2
A ComPuter Art form
The artist must not forget that each of his materials conceals within itself the way in which
it should be used, and it is this application that the artist must discover.
Wassily Kandinsky
The previous chapter defined digital art and then presented an argument
that explains why digital art isn’t a new art form. This argument also tells
us what’s needed to show that computer art is a new art form. The task is
to explain why computer art is an appreciative art kind. In approaching this
task, it makes sense to address three questions: the specialization question,
the value question, and the art question.
what is computer art?
Art kinds are groups of works that share some common feature not seen in
other kinds of art. So if computer art is an art kind, then works of computer
art must share specific features that set them apart from works in other art
forms. What features? That’s the specialization question:
what features of some computer-based works make them works in the
computer art form and set them apart from other kinds of art?
-- 1 of 14 --
A PHILOSOPHY OF COMPUTER ART 22
Chapters 3, 4, and 5 take up the specialization question in detail. For now, here
are five real-life examples that suggest a working theory of computer art.
Jeffrey Shaw, Golden Calf, 1995 (fig. 2.1)
Before you stands a white plinth like those used for displaying statues in
museums. Next to the plinth is a portable LCD display. When you pick it
up, it shows the space in front of you; and when you turn to the plinth,
it shows you the plinth surmounted by a golden calf. You can inspect the
calf from every angle as you circle the plinth with the display. Perhaps you
recall Poussin’s Adoration of the Golden Calf or the original Old Testament story
where the golden calf is a figure of idolatry – taking an image for some-
thing it’s not.
Ken Goldberg, Telegarden, 1995–2004 (fig. 2.2)
A room in Austria contains a small garden over which hovers a robot
equipped with a video sensor and appendages for delivering water and
seeds. Along with thousands of other telegardeners around the world,
you regularly visit a website that allows you to move the robot to get a
view of different sectors of the garden and tend the plants in those sectors.
According to one commentator, the work “creates a physical garden as an
environment to stage social interaction and community in virtual space.
Telegarden is a metaphor for the care and feeding of the delicate social ecology
of the net.”1
Damian Lopes, Project X, 1997 (fig. 2.3)
You’re looking at a screen of verse telling part of the story of Vasco da Gama’s
voyage round Africa to Asia. Every word of the text is a hyperlink that trans-
ports you to a new screen that elaborates, opposes, or recontextualizes the
previous screen. The text on this screen is also hyperlinked. Having selected
several links you come to realize that the sequence of screens comprises an
epic with no prescribed order of reading. Reading the epic is an act of navi-
gation into the unknown, and you must assemble what you learn from each
trip through the site into a map that tells the whole story.
-- 2 of 14 --
Figure 2.1
Stills of Jeffrey Shaw,
Golden Calf, 1995
-- 3 of 14 --
Figure 2.2 Still of Ken Goldberg, Telegarden, 1995–2004
Figure 2.3 Screenshot of Damian Lopes, Project X, 1997
-- 4 of 14 --
25 A COMPUTER ART FORM
Scott Snibbe, Boundary Functions, 1998 (fig. 2.4)
You and a companion step onto a slightly raised platform and a line is
projected onto the floor halfway between you. As more people join in, more
lines are drawn, creating an irregular tiled pattern. Try as you might – and
some children who have just stepped in are trying very hard – you cannot
step outside your boundary. Someone remarks that Boundary Functions was the
title of the doctoral thesis of Theodore Kaczynski, the Unabomber.
Hisako Yamakawa, Kodama – Mischievous Echoes, 2005
As you approach the room you hear voices, but when you enter you find
yourself in a quiet space bounded by rich moving images of an uninhab-
ited forest. The voices return when you leave the room and, if you spoke
when you were in the room, you find that one of the voices mischievously
Figure 2.4 Schematic of Scott Snibbe, Boundary Functions, 1998
-- 5 of 14 --
A PHILOSOPHY OF COMPUTER ART 26
imitates you. The guide explains that, in Japanese lore, kodama are tree spirits
that steal and play with people’s voices. You return to the room to have a
word with them.
These five works have very different kinds of displays. The display of Golden
Calf is a plinth and a digital image on an LCD screen. Telegarden’s display is a
living garden and digital images of that garden as well as the movements of
the robotic armature. Project X displays images alongside text arranged into
lines of verse for viewing in a web browser. Boundary Functions projects Voronoi
tessellation patterns in laser light onto a space. Kodama involves sound as well
as images. Notice that not all of these displays are digital – there’s nothing
digital about Golden Calf’s plinth, for example.
Yet all five displays are associated with traditional art forms. All five use
images. Golden Calf borrows from sculpture and Kodama incorporates elements
of cinema and music. Project X involves poetry, and there’s obviously some
theater in Boundary Functions and, less obviously, in Telegarden too. Finally,
Telegarden takes traditional landscape architecture in a new direction. Every
work of computer art must present a display of some kind, and the display
will exploit text, static images, moving images, three-dimensional objects
and spaces, bodily movements, or sounds. These are the building blocks of
literature, pictorial art, film, sculpture and architecture, theater, and music.
It’s easy to doubt that there’s a distinctive computer art form. Why not
say that our five examples are simply digital art? All of them are made by
computer and some have displays in a common, digital code.
Something sets Golden Calf, Telegarden, Project X, Boundary Functions, and Kodama
apart from traditional art. All five are interactive. In every case, what happens
with the work is a result of some activity on the part of the audience.
Moreover, this interaction is negotiated by a computer. A computer gener-
ates the display of Golden Calf from input sensors in the LCD screen. Telegarden’s
robot takes instructions submitted via a website, and Project X also takes input
from a website in order to determine what text and images to display. Like
Golden Calf, Boundary Functions uses a location sensor to project images, but
it runs a Voronoi diagram algorithm to direct lasers. Kodama records and
manipulates sound for playback.
Interactivity can be defined in a dozen different ways. On some defini-
tions, every work of art is interactive, or many are, so that interactivity isn’t
specific to computer art. The next chapter seizes this problem by the horns.
For now, it’s enough if you grant that the five examples are clearly interac-
tive in a way that you recognize, even if it remains to be defined.
-- 6 of 14 --
27 A COMPUTER ART FORM
It will be enough to compile a working theory of computer art that will
tell us which works belong in the art form.
CAF: an item is a computer art work just in case (1) it’s art, (2) it’s run on
a computer, (3) it’s interactive, and (4) it’s interactive because it’s run on
a computer.
Let’s unpack this a little.
What is it for a work to be run on a computer? The next chapter supplies
the answer, but CAF tells us this much. Computer art works exploit the tech-
nology of computing in order to achieve interactivity. Thus not all works
that are in some sense run on a computer are works of computer art. My
iPod plays my favorite tunes for me, and in some sense they’re run on a
computer, but playing Radiohead on an iPod isn’t interactive in the same
way as our five cases. The lesson is that we should expect to get a sharper
idea of interactivity and of the role of computers in computer art at one and
the same time – that’s the job of chapter 3.
Second, CAF allows that the displays of computer art works overlap with
traditional art forms – images and text, for example. In other words, CAF is
consistent with the obvious fact that computer art shares a lot with digital
works in traditional art forms. However, it doesn’t follow that computer
art is the same as digital art. When images, text, sound, and traditional art
media appear in computer art, they’re harnessed to achieve something not
found in other art: interactivity.
So CAF begins to frame an answer to the specialization question: computer-
based interactivity is the special feature that distinguishes computer art
from digital art and indeed all the other arts. But it’s only the beginning of an
answer. The five works described above are interactive in some interesting
sense, but we must pin down exactly how they’re interactive. It had better
turn out that they’re interactive in a special way, and it had better turn out
that their interactivity exploits computing technology, otherwise we should
talk of “interactive art” instead of “computer art.”
But is it art?
The first clause of CAF boldly assumes that some interactive, computer-
based works are works of art, and this raises the treacherous question: what
is art? After all, a critic of CAF might say, “I concede that some computer-
based works are interactive in some special sense. Define it however you like.
-- 7 of 14 --
A PHILOSOPHY OF COMPUTER ART 28
Nevertheless, you can’t get art through interactivity. These interactive works
you describe are all very interesting, but they’re not art.” In other words,
nothing satisfies both clause (1) and also clauses (2) to (4) of CAF. Whereas
this critic assumes a view of art that rules out computer-based interactive
works, CAF implies a view of art that makes room for computer-based inter-
active art. Whose view of art is right? What’s the answer to the art question:
why do computer-based interactive works count as art?
Chapter 7 tackles this question and a related puzzle. Don’t video games fit
clauses (2) to (4) of CAF? Aren’t they interactive because they’re run on
computer? If so, then shouldn’t we count video games as art?
And is it valuable?
Chapters 3 to 5 argue that computer art, as defined by CAF, is an apprecia-
tive kind, and chapter 7 argues that it’s an art kind. So computer art is an
appreciative art kind. We normally appreciate works like Project X, Telegarden,
Golden Calf, Boundary Functions, and Kodama by comparison with each other, for
their computer-based interactivity. Presumably, though, we appreciate art
works in order to get at their value. There’s no point in appreciating works
of computer art if they’re utterly worthless. Hence the value question:
what is the value of computer art works?
With the help of CAF, we can be more specific: what’s the value of an item
that’s run on a computer, that’s interactive, and that’s interactive because it’s
run on a computer?
The value question doesn’t come up in a vacuum. Computers are the
objects of some suspicion, and there have been well-publicized critiques
of computer-based art. Since those who have suspicions about computers
don’t clearly differentiate digital art from computer art, let’s use
“computer-based art” neutrally, to apply to either digital art or computer
art. In chapter 6, we’ll try to figure out which critiques specifically target
digital art and which ones target computer art as defined by CAF. An
answer to the value question will depend on CAF as an answer to the
specialization question.
The argument from the creativity sink. Some complain that computer technology
limits the artist’s control over her work. If the value of art lies in its providing
-- 8 of 14 --
29 A COMPUTER ART FORM
an outlet to individual expression, then works made by computer lack this
value. Putting the argument explicitly,
1 a work has value as art only to the extent that it expresses the creativity of
its maker,
2 computer-based art works inhibit their makers’ creativity,
3 so computer-based art works lack artistic value.
If both premises of this argument are true, then its conclusion is true; but
are its premises true? Premise (1) is rarely stated explicitly, and it’s dubious.
Accept it for now. Premise (2) is more interesting because the reasons given
for it bring out a conception of computer-based art.
Some complain, in support of (2), that computers standardize the art-
making process.2 Although the computer is in principle a powerful and flex-
ible machine, artists are severely constrained by software packages which
impose a uniform appearance on works – like the notorious “Photoshop
look.” Software standardizes, and an artist who adopts some software adopts
its standards. The argument is that a work doesn’t express the creativity of its
maker if it’s made using a medium that standardizes the art-making process,
and computer media standardize the art-making process, so computer-
based works don’t express the creativity of their makers.
A second reason for (2) is just as compelling. In his book on virtual reality
art, Oliver Grau argues that the makers of interactive virtual reality art must
cede control of their works.3 In some measure, audience members gain what
the artist gives up because they get to interact with the work. However, little of
the control that the artist gives up goes to the audience. Virtual reality works
are effective only in so far as they mimic reality, so the virtual reality artist is
compelled to copy reality and has no room to comment on it critically: crit-
ical commentary would spoil the effect. As Grau puts it, “the technological
paradigm of virtual reality [does not] acknowledge the responsibility of the
artist to channel the suggestive power of the images and environments.”4 The
argument is that a work can’t express the creativity of its maker if its maker is
bound to copy reality without critical comment, and makers of virtual reality
art are bound to copy reality without critical comment, so virtual reality
works don’t express the creativity of their makers. Note that this argument
makes virtual reality the defining feature of computer-based art.
The argument from the vanishing work. Clement Greenberg, one of the most
influential art critics of the last century, thought that the best art of our time
-- 9 of 14 --
A PHILOSOPHY OF COMPUTER ART 30
is characteristically about its own medium. He found its excitement “to
lie most of all in its pure preoccupation with the invention and arrange-
ment of spaces, surfaces, shapes, colors, etc. to the exclusion of what is not
necessarily implicated in these factors.” 5 This doctrine about visual art easily
generalizes to the other arts. Modern art aims to invite perceptual experi-
ence of medium and it’s valuable when it succeeds in this aim. However,
computer art hides its medium, so it fails as art. Laying out the reasoning:
1 a work (of our era) has value as art only to the extent that it invites experi-
ence of medium,
2 computer-based art works don’t invite experience of medium,
3 so computer-based art works lack artistic value.
Again, if (1) and (2) are true then (3) follows. The Greenbergian doctrine
summed up in (1) is at best a point of hot debate, so let’s be generous and
accept it for now. By focussing on the case for premise (2), we might learn
something about the nature and value of computer art.
The case for (2) is this.6 Media are perceptually available in traditional art,
but not in computer-based art. A painting, for example, is made by applying
paint to a surface, and Jackson Pollock makes paintings in which we can
see the act of painting. Likewise, color is a building block of painting, and
Joseph Albers’s paintings thematize color and color effects. In these works,
the technology of painting is made visible to the viewer. However, nothing
like this happens with computer-based art. A computer might show you a
pixelated image or play you a sequence of sounds, but it doesn’t reveal to
you the computer technology underlying the image or sounds. The code
that underlies the audio-visual display is invisible. Put metaphorically, “the
computer is the ultimate black box where production … is occluded.”7
This argument seems to fit digital art and perhaps other new media arts
(like movies and television), but not the traditional arts. It’s an open ques-
tion whether it applies to computer art.
The argument from mind numbing. This critique of computer-based art should
sound familiar. The value of an art work is measured by its power to provoke
and sustain hard thinking, and works that fail this test of profundity fail as
art. Such is the destiny of computer-based art, which gives us techno-dazzle
in place of content, blocks serious reflection, and corrodes the imagination,
all the while blinding us to its mind-numbing effects. Deleting the strong
language from this bill of indictment, we get:
-- 10 of 14 --
31 A COMPUTER ART FORM
1 a work has value as art only to the extent that it abets active thought,
2 computer-based art works impede active thought,
3 so computer-based art works lack artistic value.
This reasoning borrows from the ideas of writers like Greenberg, Max
Horkheimer, and Theodor Adorno, who denounced mass art – especially
movies, television, and popular music – as mind numbing.8
Premise (1) is credible enough as long as “active thought” is given a
reasonable interpretation, and the reasons for (2) must connect a conception
of computer-based art to a reasonable interpretation of “active thought.”
After all, nobody denies that all art requires some active thought. Horkheimer
and Adorno concede that “quickness, powers of observation, and experience
are undeniably needed to apprehend” mass art works, which nevertheless
go about “stunting the mass-media consumer’s powers of imagination and
spontaneity.” 9 Presumably, then, some other ingredient of “active thought”
is missing from our encounters with computer-based art.
Two reasons for (2) come directly from other arguments. First, in support
of the argument from the creativity sink, some accuse virtual reality works
of stifling creativity by blindly copying reality. This is also reason to suspect
them of impeding active thought. A convincing illusion of reality must
be internally coherent. Thus it cannot tolerate contradictions and unlikely
comparisons. But active thought grapples with contradictions and unlikely
comparisons. So virtual reality works impede active thought. Second, in
support of the argument from the vanishing work, some say that we can’t
attend to digital technology as a medium. But active thought about art is
thought about the medium of a work and how that medium affords experi-
ence and carries meaning. 10
A third argument for (2) is entirely new. Virtual reality art and interactive
art impede active thought because they’re immersive, but active thought
requires distance, which is incompatible with immersion.
Just as different situations afford or inhibit action, different situations
afford or inhibit cognition. Being in the dark inhibits sight, being drunk
inhibits memory, being in a library affords learning, and playing chess
affords strategic planning. “Distance” is a condition of situations which
afford active thought. The condition is never properly defined, but it’s often
described as affording selective and focussed yet leisurely attention. When
there’s distance, a thinker can inspect an object as she wishes, at the pace she
wishes. Understood in this way, distance is essential to cognitive autonomy
-- 11 of 14 --
A PHILOSOPHY OF COMPUTER ART 32
– to thinking for yourself – and that makes it an essential precondition for
critical evaluation. The art historian Aby Warburg called distance the “orig-
inal act of human civilization.”11
The argument is that computer-based art does away with distance. To begin
with, virtual reality installations control spectators’ attention, and any interac-
tions are scripted and circumscribed. For Grau “a core element of art comes
under threat: the observer’s act of distancing that is a prerequisite for any crit-
ical reflection. Aesthetic distance always comprises the possibility of attaining
an overall view, of understanding organization, structure, and function, and
achieving a critical appraisal.”12 In addition, distance has a temporal dimen-
sion: distance means time to think. However, computer-based art is too fast
for distance. Warburg originally made this complaint about the telephone
and telegraph. Nowadays, Paul Virilio sounds the alarm about the cognitive
tyranny of real-time processing.13 Computer-based art manages the reactions
of its audience so that they’re no longer thinking for themselves.
The argument from mind control. Having enfeebled the mind, it’s a short step
to taking control. Horkheimer and Adorno argue that mass media, espe-
cially movies and television, feed their audiences with a formulaic diet
that “produces, controls, and disciplines consumers’ needs” by creating
the illusion that “the outside world is the straightforward continuation of
that presented in the screen.”14 Jean Baudrillard pushes the view that mass
communication technologies only offer “the spectacle of thought and …
people opt for the spectacle of thought rather than thought itself.” 15 Lev
Manovich has added a new element to this argument.
According to Manovich, some mental processes are externalized. 16
Moving pictures externalize vision, for example, and stories externalize
narrative reasoning. We think with these externalizations – and that’s their
power. We would be lost without maps, which externalize way-finding, for
example. The trouble is that externalizations can be regulated and manipu-
lated, and in so far as our own thoughts depend on externalizations, they’re
also regulated and manipulated. Manovich fears exactly this:
Mental processes of reflection, problem solving, memory and associa-
tion are externalized, equated with following a link, moving to a new
image, choosing a new scene or a text ... Now, with interactive media,
instead of looking at a painting and mentally following our own private
associations to other images, memories, ideas, we are asked to click on
the image on the screen in order to go to another image on the screen,
and so on. Thus we are asked to follow pre-programmed, objectively
-- 12 of 14 --
33 A COMPUTER ART FORM
existing associations ... we are asked to mistake the structure of some-
body else’s mind for our own. 17
The result is that “interactive computer installations indeed represent an
advanced form of audience manipulation.”18
Come to think of it, this worry isn’t all that new – it goes back to Plato’s
allegory of the cave, which echoes all the way down the centuries to The
Matrix. Plato’s cave-dwellers, exposed only to images on the cave wall, are
under the illusion that what they see is reality. As a result, they’re vulner-
able to manipulation if the shadows are cast by puppeteers. In the cinematic
update of Plato’s cave, Neo’s personal autonomy is linked to seeing the
Matrix for what it is – lines of green code – and hence to weaning himself
off it as a vehicle for his own thoughts.
Defining “free thought” as thought that’s free of manipulation by exter-
nalization, here’s the argument from mind control:
1 a work has value as art only to the extent that it abets free thought,
2 computer-based art works impede free thought,
3 so computer-based art works lack artistic value.
Grant (1) as usual. The strength of the argument rests on (2) and thus on
the idea that computer-based art externalizes thinking in a way that leaves it
vulnerable to manipulation.
The arguments from mind numbing and mind control are nakedly polit-
ical. Adorno writes that high tech art media are designed to “enhance the
power of the powerful” by blocking the “development of autonomous,
independent individuals who judge and decide consciously for themselves
... obstructing the emancipation for which human beings are as ripe as the
productive forces of the epoch permit.”19 As a Marxist, Adorno views art’s
value as political and emancipatory: he assumes that a work has value as art
only to the extent that it abets active and free thought. By granting these
premises, we can avoid getting into a political debate and we can treat the
arguments from mind numbing and mind control apolitically.
All four critiques of computer-based art should be taken seriously by
anyone who is otherwise suspicious of the kind of speculation that toler-
ates ungrounded empirical claims and fanciful reasoning. Three of the four
critiques echo popular worries about new media. These media don’t tap
the full extent of human creativity. New media art works don’t challenge
-- 13 of 14 --
A PHILOSOPHY OF COMPUTER ART 34
the mind the way traditional works do. Given their seductive slickness and
commercial ties, they manipulate us as consumers. These popular worries
aren’t expressed in precisely the same form as the arguments from the crea-
tivity sink, mind numbing, and mind control. Still, by addressing these
arguments, we indirectly address popular worries and answer the value
question. That’s the task of chapters 6 and 7.
The specialization question, the art question, and the value question come
as a package. Critics of the value of computer-based art begin with assump-
tions about its character – that it aims at virtual reality, for example. In other
words, they begin with an answer to the specialization question. Beginning
with a different answer may lead to a more optimistic response to the value
question. So let’s look at CAF as an answer to the specialization question.
-- 14 of 14 --