“Panopticism” from Discipline & Punish: The Birth of the
Prison
Michel Foucault
Race/Ethnicity: Multidisciplinary Global Contexts, Volume 2, Number
1, Autumn 2008, pp. 1-12 (Article)
Published by Indiana University Press
For additional information about this article
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/252435
[208.59.56.252] Project MUSE (2026-04-04 20:08 GMT)
-- 1 of 13 --
autumn 2008 1
Panopticism from
Discipline & Punish:
The Birth of the Prison
Michel Foucault
he following, according to an order published at the
end of the seventeenth century, were the measures to
be taken when the plague appeared in a town.1
First, a strict spatial partitioning: the closing of the town and
its outlying districts, a prohibition to leave the town on pain of
death, the killing of all stray animals; the division of the town
into distinct quarters, each governed by an intendant. Each
street is placed under the authority of a syndic, who keeps it
under surveillance; if he leaves the street, he will be con-
demned to death. On the appointed day, everyone is ordered to
stay indoors: it is forbidden to leave on pain of death. The syn-
dic himself comes to lock the door of each house from the out-
side; he takes the key with him and hands it over to the inten-
dant of the quarter; the intendant keeps it until the end of the
quarantine. Each family will have made its own provisions;
but, for bread and wine, small wooden canals are set up be-
tween the street and the interior of the houses, thus allowing
each person to receive his ration without communicating with
the supplier and other residents; meat, fish and herbs will be
hoisted up into the houses with pulleys and baskets. If it is ab-
solutely necessary to leave the house, it will be done in turn,
avoiding any meeting. Only the intendants, syndics and guards
will move about the streets and also, between the infected
houses, from one corpse to another, the ‘crows’, who can be left
to die: these are ‘people of little substance who carry the sick,
bury the dead, clean and do many vile and abject offices’. It is a
segmented, immobile, frozen space. Each individual is fixed in
his place. And, if he moves, he does so at the risk of his life,
contagion or punishment.
T
© 2008 The Ohio State University/Office
of Minority Affairs/The Kirwan Institute
“Panopticism” excerpt from DISCIPLINE AND PUNISH by Michel Fou-
cault. English Translation copyright © 1977 by Alan Sheridan (New York:
Pantheon). Originally published in French as Surveiller et Punir. Copyright
© 1975 by Editions Gallimard. Reprinted by permission of Georges Bor-
chardt, Inc. for Editions Gallimard.
[208.59.56.252]
Project MUSE (2026-04-04 20:08 GMT)
-- 2 of 13 --
Inspection functions ceaselessly. The gaze is alert everywhere:
‘A considerable body of militia, commanded by good officers
and men of substance’, guards at the gates, at the town hall and
in every quarter to ensure the prompt obedience of the people
and the most absolute authority of the magistrates, ‘as also to
observe all disorder, theft and extortion’. At each of the town
gates there will be an observation post; at the end of each street
sentinels. Every day, the intendant visits the quarter in his charge,
inquires whether the syndics have carried out their tasks,
whether the inhabitants have anything to complain of; they ‘ob-
serve their actions’. Every day, too, the syndic goes into the
street for which he is responsible; stops before each house: gets
all the inhabitants to appear at the windows (those who live
overlooking the courtyard will be allocated a window looking
onto the street at which no one but they may show themselves);
he calls each of them by name; informs himself as to the state of
each and every one of them—‘in which respect the inhabitants
will be compelled to speak the truth under pain of death’; if
someone does not appear at the window, the syndic must ask
why: ‘In this way he will find out easily enough whether dead
or sick are being concealed.’ Everyone locked up in his cage,
everyone at his window, answering to his name and showing
himself when asked—it is the great review of the living and the
dead.
This surveillance is based on a system of permanent regis-
tration: reports from the syndics to the intendants, from the in-
tendants to the magistrates or mayor. At the beginning of the
‘lock up’, the role of each of the inhabitants present in the town
is laid down, one by one; this document bears ‘the name, age,
sex of everyone, notwithstanding his condition’: a copy is sent
to the intendant of the quarter, another to the office of the town
hall, another to enable the syndic to make his daily roll call. Ev-
erything that may be observed during the course of the visits—
deaths, illnesses, complaints, irregularities—is noted down and
transmitted to the intendants and magistrates. The magistrates
have complete control over medical treatment; they have ap-
pointed a physician in charge; no other practitioner may treat,
no apothecary prepare medicine, no confessor visit a sick per-
son without having received from him a written note ‘to pre-
vent anyone from concealing and dealing with those sick of the
contagion, unknown to the magistrates’. The registration of the
pathological must be constantly centralized. The relation of
each individual to his disease and to his death passes through
the representatives of power, the registration they make of it,
the decisions they take on it.
Five or six days after the beginning of the quarantine, the
process of purifying the houses one by one is begun. All the in-
habitants are made to leave; in each room ‘the furniture and
goods’ are raised from the ground or suspended from the air;
perfume is poured around the room; after carefully sealing the
windows, doors and even the keyholes with wax, the perfume
is set alight. Finally, the entire hose is closed while the perfume
race /ethnicity vol. 2 / no. 1 2
michel foucault
-- 3 of 13 --
is consumed; those who have carried out the work are searched,
as they were on entry, ‘in the presence of the residents of the
house, to see that they did not have something on their persons
as they left that they did not have on entering’. Four hours later,
the residents are allowed to re-enter their homes.
This enclosed, segmented space, observed at every point, in
which the individuals are inserted in a fixed place, in which
the slightest movements are supervised, in which all events are
recorded, in which an uninterrupted work of writing links the
centre and periphery, in which power is exercised without di-
vision, according to a continuous hierarchical figure, in which
each individual is constantly located, examined and distribut-
ed among the living beings, the sick and the dead—all this
constitutes a compact model of the disciplinary mechanism.
The plague is met by order; its function is to sort out every
possible confusion: that of the disease, which is transmitted
when bodies are mixed together; that of the evil, which is in-
creased when fear and death overcome prohibitions. It lays
down for each individual his place, his body, his disease and
his death, his well-being, by means of an omnipresent and om-
niscient power that subdivides itself in a regular, uninter-
rupted way even to the ultimate determination of the individ-
ual, of what characterizes him, of what belongs to him, of what
happens to him. Against the plague, which is a mixture, disci-
pline brings into play its power, which is one of analysis. A
whole literary fiction of the festival grew up around the
plague: suspended laws, lifted prohibitions, the frenzy of pass-
ing time, bodies mingling together without respect, individu-
als unmasked, abandoning their statutory identity and the fig-
ure under which they had been recognized, allowing a quite
different truth to appear. But there was also a political dream
of the plague, which was exactly its reverse: not the collective
festival, but strict division; not laws transgressed, but the pen-
etration of regulation into even the smallest details of every-
day life through the mediation of the complete hierarchy that
assured the capillary functioning of power; not masks that
were put on and taken off, but the assignment to each individ-
ual of his ‘true’ name, his ‘true’ place, his ‘true’ body, his ‘true’
disease. The plague as a form, at once real and imaginary, of
disorder had as its medical and political correlative discipline.
Behind the disciplinary mechanisms can be read the haunting
memory of ‘contagions’, of the plague, of rebellions, crimes,
vagabondage, desertions, people who appear and disappear,
live and die in disorder.
If it is true that the leper gave rise to rituals of exclusion,
which to a certain extent provided the model for and general
form of the great Confinement, then the plague gave rise to
disciplinary projects. Rather than the massive, binary division
between one set of people and another, it called for multiple
separations, individualizing distributions, and organization in
depth of surveillance and control, an intensification and a ram-
ification of power. The leper was caught up in a practice of re-
autumn 2008 3
panopticism
[208.59.56.252]
Project MUSE (2026-04-04 20:08 GMT)
-- 4 of 13 --
jection, of exile-enclosure; he was left to his doom in a mass
among which it was useless to differentiate; those sick of the
plague were caught up in a meticulous tactical partitioning in
which individual differentiations were the constricting effects
of a power that multiplied, articulated and subdivided itself;
the great confinement on the one hand; the correct training on
the other. The leper and his separation; the plague and its seg-
mentations. The first is marked; the second analysed and dis-
tributed. The exile of the leper and the arrest of the plague do
no bring with them the same political dream. The first is that
of a pure community, the second that of a disciplined society.
Two ways of exercising power over men, of controlling their
relations, of separating out their dangerous mixtures. The
plague-stricken town, traversed throughout with hierarchy,
surveillance, observation, writing; the town immobilized by
the functioning of an extensive power that bears in a distinct
way over all individual bodies—this is the utopia of the per-
fectly governed city. The plague (envisaged as a possibility at
least) is the trial in the course of which one may define ideally
the exercise of disciplinary power. In order to make rights and
laws function according to pure theory, the jurists place them-
selves in imagination in the state of nature; in order to see
perfect disciplines functioning, rulers dreamt of the state of
plague. Underlying disciplinary projects the image of the plague
stands for all forms of confusion and disorder; just as the image
of the leper, cut off from all human contact, underlies projects
of exclusion.
They are different projects, then, but not incompatible ones.
We see them coming slowly together, and it is the peculiarity of
the nineteenth century that it applied to the space of exclusion
of which the leper was the symbolic inhabitant (beggars,
vagabonds, madmen and the disorderly formed the real popu-
lation) the technique of power proper to disciplinary partition-
ing. Treat ‘lepers’ as ‘plague victims’, project the subtle segmen-
tations of discipline onto the confused space of internment,
combine it with the methods of analytical distribution proper to
power, individualize the excluded, but use procedures of indi-
vidualization to mark exclusion—this is what was operated
regularly by disciplinary power from the beginning of the nine-
teenth century in the psychiatric asylum, the penitentiary, the
reformatory, the approved school and, to some extent, the hos-
pital. General speaking all the authorities exercising individual
control function according to a double mode; that of binary di-
vision and branding (mad/sane; dangerous/harmless; nor-
mal/abnormal); and that of coercive assignment, of differential
distribution (who he is; where his must be; how he is to be
characterized; how he is to be recognized; how a constant
surveillance is to be exercised over him in an individual way,
etc.). On the one hand, the lepers are treated as plague victims;
the tactics of individualizing disciplines are imposed on the ex-
cluded; and, on the other hand, the universality of disciplinary
controls makes it possible to brand the ‘leper’ and to bring into
race /ethnicity vol. 2 / no. 1 4
michel foucault
-- 5 of 13 --
play against him the dualistic mechanisms of exclusion. The
constant division between the normal and the abnormal, to
which every individual is subjected, brings us back to our own
time, by applying the binary branding and the exile of the leper
to quite different objects; the existence of a whole set of tech-
niques and institutions for measuring, supervising and correct-
ing the abnormal brings into play the disciplinary mechanisms
to which the fear of the plaque gave rise. All the mechanisms of
power which, even today, are disposed around the abnormal
individual, to brand him and to alter him, are composed of
those two forms from which they distantly derive.
Bentham’s Panopticon is the architectural figure of this com-
position. We know the principle on which it was based: at the
periphery, an annular building; at the centre, a tower; this
tower is pierced with wide windows that open onto the inner
side of the ring; the peripheric building is divided into cells,
each of which extends the whole width of the building; they
have two windows, one on the inside, corresponding to the
windows of the tower; the other, on the outside, allows the
light to cross the cell from one end to the other. All that is
needed, then, is to place a supervisor in a central tower and to
shut up in each cell a madman, a patient, a condemned man, a
worker or a schoolboy. By the effect of backlighting, one can ob-
serve from the tower, standing out precisely against the light,
the small captive shadows in the cells of the periphery. They are
like so many cages, so many small theatres, in which each actor
is alone, perfectly individualized and constantly visible. The
panoptic mechanism arranges spatial unities that make it pos-
sible to see constantly and to recognize immediately. In short, it
reverses the principle of the dungeon; or rather of its three
functions—to enclose, to deprive of light and to hide—it pre-
serves only the first and eliminates the other two. Full lighting
and the eye of a supervisor capture better than darkness, which
ultimately protected. Visibility is a trap.
To begin with, this made it possible—as a negative effect—to
avoid those compact, swarming, howling masses that were to
be found in places of confinement, those painted by Goya or de-
scribed by Howard. Each individual, in his place, is securely
confined to a cell from which he is seen from the front by the su-
pervisor; but the side walls prevent him from coming into con-
tact with his companions. He is seen, but he does not see; he is
the object of information, never a subject in communication.
The arrangement of his room, opposite the central tower, im-
poses on him an axial visibility; but the divisions of the ring,
those separated cells, imply a lateral invisibility. And this invis-
ibility is a guarantee of order. If the inmates are convicts, there
is no danger of a plot, and attempt at collective escape, the plan-
ning of new crimes for the future, bad reciprocal influences; if
they are patients, there is no danger of contagion; if they are
madmen there is no risk of their committing violence upon one
another; if they are schoolchildren, there is no copying, no
autumn 2008 5
panopticism
[208.59.56.252]
Project MUSE (2026-04-04 20:08 GMT)
-- 6 of 13 --
noise, no chatter, no waste of time; if they are workers, there are
no disorders, no theft, no coalitions, none of those distractions
that slow down the rate of work, make it less perfect or cause
accidents. The crowd, a compact mass, a locus of multiple ex-
changes, individualities merging together, a collective effect, is
abolished and replaced by a collection of separated individuali-
ties. From the point of view of the guardian, it is replaced by a
multiplicity that can be numbered and supervised; from the
point of view of the inmates, by a sequestered and observed
solitude (Bentham, 60–64).
Hence the major effect of the Panopticon: to induce in the in-
mate a state of conscious and permanent visibility that assures
the automatic functioning of power. So to arrange things that
the surveillance is permanent in its effects, even if it is discon-
tinuous in its action; that the perfection of power should tend
to render its actual exercise unnecessary; that this architectural
apparatus should be a machine for creating and sustaining a
power relation independent of the person who exercises it; in
short, that the inmates should be caught up in a power situa-
tion of which they are themselves the bearers. To achieve this, it
is at once too much and too little that the prisoner should be
constantly observed by an inspector: too little, for what matters
is that he knows himself to be observed; too much, because he
has no need in fact of being so. In view of this, Bentham laid
down the principle that power should be visible and unverifi-
able. Visible: the inmate will constantly have before his eyes the
tall outline of the central tower from which he is spied upon.
Unverifiable: the inmate must never know whether he is being
looked at at any one moment; but he must be sure that he may
always be so. In order to make the presence or absence of the
inspector unverifiable, so that the prisoners, in their cells, can-
not even see a shadow, Bentham envisaged not only venetian
blinds on the windows of the central observation hall, but, on
the inside, partitions that intersected the hall at right angles
and, in order to pass from one quarter to the other, not doors
but zig-zag openings; for the slightest noise, a gleam of light, a
brightness in a half-opened door would betray the presence of
the guardian. 2 The Panopticon is a machine for dissociating the
see/being seen dyad: in the peripheric ring, one is totally seen,
without ever seeing; in the central tower, one sees everything
without ever being seen.3
It is an important mechanism, for it automatizes and disin-
dividualizes power. Power has its principle not so much in a
person as in a certain concerted distribution of bodies, surfaces,
lights, gazes; in an arrangement whose internal mechanisms
produce the relation in which individuals are caught up. The
ceremonies, the rituals, the marks by which the sovereign’s sur-
plus power was manifested are useless. There is a machinery
that assures dissymmetry, disequilibrium, difference. Conse-
quently, it does not matter who exercises power. Any individ-
ual, taken almost at random, can operate the machine: in the
absence of the director, his family, his friends, his visitors, even
race /ethnicity vol. 2 / no. 1 6
michel foucault
-- 7 of 13 --
his servants (Bentham, 45). Similarly, it does not matter what
motive animates him: the curiosity of the indiscreet, the malice
of a child, the thirst for knowledge of a philosopher who
wishes to visit this museum of human nature, or the perversity
of those who take pleasure in spying and punishing. The more
numerous those anonymous and temporary observers are, the
greater the risk for the inmate of being surprised and the
greater his anxious awareness of being observed. The Panopti-
con is a marvelous machine which, whatever use one may wish
to put it to, produces homogeneous effects of power.
A real subjection is born mechanically from a fictitious rela-
tion. So it is not necessary to use force to constrain the convict
to good behaviour, the madman to calm, the worker to work,
the schoolboy to application, the patient to the observation of
the regulations. Bentham was surprised that panoptic institu-
tions could be so light: there were no more bars, no more
chains, no more heavy locks; all that was needed was that the
separations should be clear and the openings well arranged.
The heaviness of the old ‘houses of security’, with their fortress-
like architecture, could be replaced by the simple, economic ge-
ometry of a ‘house of certainty’. The efficiency of power, its
constraining force have, in a sense, passed over to the other
side—to the side of its surface of application. He who is sub-
jected to a field of visibility, and who knows it, assumes respon-
sibility for the constraints of power; he makes them play spon-
taneously upon himself; he inscribes in himself the power
relation in which he simultaneously plays both roles; he be-
comes the principle of his own subjection. By this very fact, the
external power may throw off its physical weight; it tends to
the non-corporal; and, the more it approaches this limit, the
more constant, profound and permanent are its effects: it is a
perpetual victory that avoids any physical confrontation and
which is always decided in advance.
Bentham does not say whether he was inspired, in his pro-
ject, by Le Vaux’s menagerie at Versailles: the first menagerie in
which the different elements are not, as they traditionally were,
distributed in a park (Loisel, 104–7). At the centre was an octag-
onal pavilion which, on the first floor, consisted of only a single
room, the king’s salon; on every side large windows looked out
onto seven cages (the eighth side was reserved for the en-
trance), containing different species of animals. By Bentham’s
time, this menagerie had disappeared. But one finds in the pro-
gramme of the Panopticon a similar concern with individualiz-
ing observation, with characterization and classification, with
the analytical arrangement of space. The Panopticon is a royal
menagerie; the animal is replaced by man, individual distribu-
tion by specific grouping and the king by the machinery of a
furtive power. With this exception, the Panopticon also does the
work of a naturalist. It makes it possible to draw up differences:
among patients, to observe the symptoms of each individual,
without the proximity of beds, the circulation of miasmas, the
effects of contagion confusing the clinical tables; among
autumn 2008 7
panopticism
[208.59.56.252]
Project MUSE (2026-04-04 20:08 GMT)
-- 8 of 13 --
schoolchildren, it makes it possible to observe performances
(without there being any imitation or copying), to map apti-
tudes, to assess characters, to draw up rigorous classifications,
and, in relation to normal development, to distinguish ‘laziness
and stubbornness’ from ‘incurable imbecility’; among workers,
it makes it possible to note the aptitudes of each worker, com-
pare the time he takes to perform a task, and if they are paid by
the day, to calculate their wages (Bentham, 60–64).
So much for the question of observation. But the Panopticon
was also a laboratory; it could be used as a machine to carry out
experiments, to alter behaviour, to train or correct individuals.
To experiment with medicines and monitor their effects. To
try out different punishments on prisoners, according to their
crimes and character, and to seek the most effective ones. To
teach different techniques simultaneously to the workers, to de-
cide which is the best. To try out pedagogical experiments—
and in particular to take up once again the well-debated prob-
lem of secluded education, by using orphans. One would see
what would happen when, in their sixteenth or eighteenth year,
they were presented with other boys or girls; one could verify
whether, as Helvetius thought, anyone could learn anything;
one would follow ‘the genealogy of every observable idea’; one
could bring up different children according to different systems
of thought, making certain children believe that two and two
do not make four or that the moon is a cheese, then put them
together when they are twenty or twenty-five years old; one
would then have discussions that would be worth a great deal
more than the sermons or lectures on which so much money is
spent; one would have at least an opportunity of making dis-
coveries in the domain of metaphysics. The Panopticon is a
privileged place for experiments on men, and for analyzing
with complete certainty the transformations that may be ob-
tained from them. The Panopticon may even provide an appa-
ratus for supervising its own mechanisms. In this central tower,
the director may spy on all the employees that he has under his
orders: nurses, doctors, foremen, teachers, warders; he will be
able to judge them continuously, alter their behaviour, impose
upon them the methods he thinks best; and it will even be pos-
sible to observe the director himself. An inspector arriving un-
expectedly at the centre of the Panopticon will be able to judge
at a glance, without anything being concealed from him, how
the entire establishment is functioning. And, in any case, en-
closed as he is in the middle of this architectural mechanism, is
not the director’s own fate entirely bound up with it? The in-
competent physician who has allowed contagion to spread, the
incompetent prison governor or workshop manager will be the
first victims of an epidemic or a revolt. ‘”By every tie I could
devise”, said the master of the Panopticon, “my own fate had
been bound up by me with theirs”’ (Bentham, 177). The Panop-
ticon functions as a kind of laboratory of power. Thanks to its
mechanisms of observation, it gains in efficiency and in the
ability to penetrate into men’s behaviour; knowledge follows
race /ethnicity vol. 2 / no. 1 8
michel foucault
-- 9 of 13 --
the advances of power, discovering new objects of knowledge
over all the surfaces on which power is exercised.
The plague-stricken town, the panoptic establishment—the
differences are important. They mark, at a distance of a century
and a half, the transformations of the disciplinary programme.
In the first case, there is an exceptional situation: against an ex-
traordinary evil, power is mobilized; it makes itself everywhere
present and visible; it invents new mechanisms; it separates, it
immobilizes, it partitions; it constructs for a time what is both a
counter-city and the perfect society; it imposes an ideal func-
tioning, but one that is reduced, in the final analysis, like the
evil that it combats, to a simple dualism of life and death: that
which moves brings death, and one kills that which moves.
The Panopticon, on the other hand, must be understood as a
generalizable model of functioning; a way of defining power
relations in terms of the everyday life of men. No doubt Ben-
tham presents it as a particular institution, closed in upon itself.
Utopias, perfectly closed in upon themselves, are common
enough. As opposed to the ruined prisons, littered with mech-
anisms of torture, to be seen in Piranese’s engravings, the Pan-
opticon presents a cruel, ingenious cage. The fact that it should
have given rise, even in our own time, to so many variations,
projected or realized, is evidence of the imaginary intensity
that it has possessed for almost two hundred years. But the
Panopticon must not be understood as a dream building: it is
the diagram of a mechanism of power reduced to its ideal
form; its functioning, abstracted from any obstacle, resistance
or friction, must be represented as a pure architectural and op-
tical system: it is in fact a figure of political technology that
may and must be detached from any specific use.
It is polyvalent in its applications; it serves to reform pris-
oners, but also to treat patients, to instruct schoolchildren, to
confine the insane, to supervise workers, to put beggars and
idlers to work. It is a type of location of bodies in space, of dis-
tribution of individuals in relation to one another, of hierarchi-
cal organization, of disposition of centres and channels of
power, of definition of the instruments and modes of interven-
tion of power, which can be implemented in hospitals, work-
shops, schools, prisons. Whenever one is dealing with a multi-
plicity of individuals on whom a task or a particular form of
behaviour must be imposed, the panoptic schema may be used.
It is—necessary modifications apart—applicable ‘to all estab-
lishments whatsoever, in which, within a space not too large to
be covered or commanded by buildings, a number of persons
are meant to be kept under inspection’ (Bentham, 40; although
Bentham takes the penitentiary house as his prime example, it
is because it has many different functions to fulfil—safe cus-
tody, confinement, solitude, forced labour and instruction).
In each of its applications, it makes it possible to perfect the
exercise of power. It does this in several ways: because it can re-
duce the number of those who exercise it, while increasing the
number of those on whom it is exercised. Because it is possible
autumn 2008 9
panopticism
[208.59.56.252]
Project MUSE (2026-04-04 20:08 GMT)
-- 10 of 13 --
to intervene at any moment and because the constant pressure
acts even before the offences, mistakes or crimes have been
committed. Because, in these conditions, its strength is that it
never intervenes, it is exercised spontaneously and without
noise, it constitutes a mechanism whose effects follow from one
another. Because, without any physical instrument other than
architecture and geometry, it acts directly on individuals; it
gives ‘power of mind over mind’. The panoptic schema makes
any apparatus of power more intense: it assures its economy (in
material, in personnel, in time); it assures its efficacity by its
preventative character, its continuous functioning and its auto-
matic mechanisms. It is a way of obtaining from power ‘in hith-
erto unexampled quantity’, ‘a great and new instrument of gov-
ernment…; its great excellence consists in the great strength it is
capable of giving to any institution it may be thought proper to
apply it to’ (Bentham, 66).
It’s a case of ‘it’s easy once you’ve thought of it’ in the polit-
ical sphere. It can in fact be integrated into any function (educa-
tion, medical treatment, production, punishment); it can in-
crease the effect of this function, by being linked closely with it;
it can constitute a mixed mechanism in which relations of
power (and of knowledge) may be precisely adjusted, in the
smallest detail, to the processes that are to be supervised; it can
establish a direct proportion between ‘surplus power’ and ‘sur-
plus production’. In short, it arranges things in such a way that
the exercise of power is not added on from the outside, like a
rigid, heavy constraint, to the functions it invests, but is so sub-
tly present in them as to increase their efficiency by itself in-
creasing its own points of contact. The panoptic mechanism is
not simply a hinge, a point of exchange between a mechanism
of power and a function; it is a way of making power relations
function in a function, and of making a function function
through these power relations. Bentham’s Preface to Panopticon
opens with a list of the benefits to be obtained from his ‘inspec-
tion-house’: ‘Morals reformed—health preserved—industry invigo-
rated—instruction diffused—public burthens lightened—Economy
seated, as it were, upon a rock—the gordian knot of the Poor-
Laws not cut, but untied—all by a simple idea in architecture!’
(Bentham, 39).
Furthermore, the arrangement of this machine is such that
its enclosed nature does not preclude a permanent presence
from the outside: we have seen that anyone may come and ex-
ercise in the central tower the functions of surveillance, and
that, this being the case, he can gain a clear idea of the way in
which the surveillance is practised. In fact, any panoptic insti-
tution, even if it is as rigorously closed as a penitentiary, may
without difficulty be subjected to such irregular and constant
inspections: and not only by the appointed inspectors, but also
by the public; any member of society will have the right to
come and see with his own eyes how the schools, hospitals,
factories, prisons function. There is no risk, therefore, that the
increase of power created by the panoptic machine may degen-
race /ethnicity vol. 2 / no. 1 10
michel foucault
-- 11 of 13 --
erate into tyranny; the disciplinary mechanism will be demo-
cratically controlled, since it will be constantly accessible ‘to the
great tribunal committee of the world’. 4 This Panopticon, sub-
tly arranged so that an observer may observe, at a glance, so
many different individuals, also enables everyone to come and
observe any of the observers. The seeing machine was once a
sort of dark room into which individuals spied; it has become a
transparent building in which the exercise of power may be su-
pervised by society as a whole.
The panoptic schema, without disappearing as such or los-
ing any of its properties, was destined to spread throughout the
social body; its vocation was to become a generalized function.
The plague-stricken town provided an exceptional disciplinary
model: perfect, but absolutely violent; to the disease that
brought death, power opposed its perpetual threat of death; life
inside it was reduced to its simplest expression; it was, against
the power of death, the meticulous exercise of the right of the
sword. The Panopticon, on the other hand, has a role of ampli-
fication; although it arranges power, although it is intended to
make it more economic and more effective, it does so not for
power itself, nor for the immediate salvation of a threatened so-
ciety: its aim is to strengthen the social forces—to increase pro-
duction, to develop the economy, spread education, raise the
level of public morality; to increase and multiply.
How is power to be strengthened in such a way that, far
from impeding progress, far from weighing upon it with its
rules and regulations, it actually facilitates such progress? What
intensificator of power will be able at the same time to be a
multiplicator of production? How will power, by increasing its
forces, be able to increase those of society instead of confiscat-
ing them or impeding them? The Panopticon’s solution to this
problem is that the productive increase of power can be assured
only if, on the one hand, it can be exercised continuously in the
very foundations of society, in the subtlest possible way, and if,
one the other hand, it functions outside these sudden, violent,
discontinuous forms that are bound up with the exercise of
sovereignty. The body of the king, with its strange material and
physical presence, with the force that he himself deploys or
transmits to some few others, is at the opposite extreme of this
new physics of power represented by panopticism; the domain
of panopticism is, on the contrary, that whole lower region, that
region of irregular bodies, with their details, their multiple
movements, their heterogeneous forces, their spatial relations;
what are required are mechanisms that analyse distributions,
gaps, series, combinations, and which use instruments that ren-
der visible, record, differentiate and compare: a physics of a re-
lational and multiple power, which has its maximum intensity
not in the person of the king, but in the bodies that can be indi-
vidualized by these relations. At the theoretical level, Bentham
defines another way of analysing the social body and the
power relations that traverse it; in terms of practice, he defines
a procedure of subordination of bodies and forces that must in-
autumn 2008 11
panopticism
-- 12 of 13 --
crease the utility of power while practising the economy of the
prince. Panopticism is the general principle of a new ‘political
anatomy’ whose object and end are not the relations of sov-
ereignty but the relations of discipline.
The celebrated, transparent, circular cage, with its high tower,
powerful and knowing, may have been for Bentham a project
of a perfect disciplinary institution; but he also set out to show
how one may ‘unlock’ the disciplines and get them to function
in a diffused, multiple, polyvalent way throughout the whole
social body. These disciplines, which the classical age had elab-
orated in specific, relatively enclosed places—barracks, schools,
workshops—and whose total implementation had been imag-
ined only at the limited and temporary scale of a plague-strick-
en town, Bentham dreamt of transforming into a network of
mechanisms that would be everywhere and always alert, run-
ning through society without interruption in space or in time.
The panoptic arrangement provides the formula for this gener-
alization. It programmes, at the level of an elementary and eas-
ily transferable mechanism, the basic functioning of a society
penetrated through and through with disciplinary mechanisms.
Endnotes
1. Archives militaires de Vincennes, A 1,516 91 sc. Pièce. This regu-
lation is broadly similar to a whole series of others that date from the
same period and earlier.
2. In the Postscript to the Panopticon, 1791, Bentham adds dark in-
spection galleries painted in black around the inspector’s lodge, each
making it possible to observe two storeys of cells.
3. In his first version of the Panopticon, Bentham had also imagined
an acoustic surveillance, operated by means of pipes leading from the
cells to the central tower. In the Postscript he abandoned the idea, per-
haps because he could not introduce into it the principle of dissymme-
try and prevent the prisoners from hearing the inspector as well as the
inspector hearing them. Julius tried to develop a system of dissym-
metrical listening (Julius, 18).
4. Imaging this continuous flow of visitors entering the central
tower by an underground passage and then observing the circular
landscape of the Panopticon, was Bentham aware of the Panoramas
that Barker was constructing at exactly the same period (the first
seems to have dated from 1787) and in which the visitors, occupying
the central place, saw unfolding around them a landscape, a city or a
battle. The visitors occupied exactly the place of the sovereign gaze.
Works Cited
Archives militaires de Vincennes, A 1,516 91 sc.
Bentham, J., Works, ed. Bowring, IV, 1843.
Julius, N. H. Leçons sur les prisons, I, 1831 (Fr. trans.).
Loisel, G. Histoire des menageries, II, 1912.
race /ethnicity vol. 2 / no. 1 12
michel foucault
-- 13 of 13 --