Social science fiction?
In this chapter we argue for the idea that networked computer tech-
nology effectuates a real and delimiting form of determinism.That is to
say, intensive and extensive computer networks that pervade our lives
shape and ‘determine’ those lives in ways that would not occur either
at all, or to the extent that they do, in the absence of computers in
such networked abundance. We are at the beginning of this process,
but the digital ‘category error’ that we made in the post-war period,
and implemented under the market guise of ‘efficiency’ in the 1970s,
has blinded us to the negative effect of the digital upon the analogue.
This has made any serious scholarship on the subject of technological
determinism easy to dismiss as the stuff of sci-fi movies or books.
We don’t argue that an army of HAL-type computers is emerging to
outsmart and enslave us. Nor do we suggest that analogue is ‘good’
and digital is ‘bad’ in any comprehensive and prescriptive sense. We
do argue that computers change fundamentally the human–technology
relationship. We have always been dependent upon technology for our
survival, but the relationship was one where humans had an active role.
With computers the dependency has increased, but our function is no
longer so active; it is more passive – and where computers lead (and
they do lead in highly specific directions), we tend to follow.
In the social sciences in particular, to refer to the work of someone
as being ‘technologically determinist’ is often enough on its own to
confine the work (and its author) to the margins of seriousness, as
the paranoia of a Luddite, or as an embarrassing, insufficiently nuanced
articulation of the complexities of modern life. Beyond the fixing of the
appellation, nothing more usually needs to be said.The noun ‘determin-
ism’ can be especially damning, betraying a seemingly rigid mindset on
the part of the author, someone relentlessly dour and whose politics,
if not personality, probably verge on the authoritarian. Referring to
8 Technological determinism
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 1 of 14 --
Technological determinism 145
computing technologies in particular, theorists in the social shaping of
technology (SST) discipline such as Judy Wajcman argue instead for an
analytical stress upon the more dominant and interesting human quali-
ties such as autonomy, diversity and potential (and avoiding any hint of
pessimism) as a ‘richer’ approach that would best ‘highlight this mutual
shaping relationship’ between humans and information technologies
(2010: 143, 150). By definition, then, to be a ‘determinist’ is to exhibit
a ‘poverty of philosophy’ as Marx put it in another context, and to
be one-dimensional in respect of the inexhaustible and irrepressible
potential in the human–technological path towards progress.
It has to be said that many of the works that do stress the power of
information technologies as decisive in determining the lives of indi-
viduals and societies often do their case no good by over-determining
it. We see this in the ‘dromological’ work of Paul Virilio who, although
rightly celebrated for his philosophical exuberance, often pushes his
central analysis of the effects of speed to the boundary. For exam-
ple, his 1995 essay on the temporal nature of cyberspace, although
prescient in many respects, lapses often into what Wajcman (2008)
has criticized as ‘social science fiction’ when he states that ‘what lies
ahead’ in our relationship with computers is a ‘mental concussion’
due to their growing accelerative and informational effects upon our
lives. As just noted, Virilio’s work is full of insight, but it is equally
crowded by sweeping claims and assertions that go badly with the
more sober-minded sections of the scholarly community, especially
many SST advocates.
If Virilio can sometimes get ahead of himself, others (in fear of the
academic ducking stool, perhaps) can hedge or equivocate and thus
weaken (by paradoxically over-determining) their argument as a conse-
quence. We see this in Wolfgang Hofkirchner, emissary of the so-called
‘Salzburg Approach’:
The spread of ICTs brings about a change in the very sphere of using and
creating technology. Technology itself changes. By coupling with the com-
puter which mechanizes certain abilities of the human brain the machine
of the industrial age which only mechanized abilities of the human body
turns into an automaton.
(2007: 32)
This short passage actually articulates two useful points, which echo
(though far too strongly) the concerns we raised in the previous chap-
ters: that machines and bodies, and computers and society, represent
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 2 of 14 --
146 The new age of digital reason
two distinct technological phases in our modernity and postmodernity.
However, Hofkirchner sees these simply as cumulative technological
disasters, resulting in the human finally becoming ‘an automaton’. This
kind of technological determinism leaves humanity (and theory) with
nowhere to go, because if we were already automatonic, then there
would be no way of resolving the problem of human freedom anyway.
We don’t argue that determinism drives us all either to ‘mental con-
cussion’ or to spend life as ‘an automaton’. Computer logic and its
networking emerges from, and still works in conjunction with, earlier
analogue forms of technology. The key point is not so much specific
‘effects’, which is rather like seeking specific effects of global warming,
which is difficult if not impossible, but the human–technology relation-
ship itself and how we are to understand it. Only if we appreciate the
nature of the relationship are we more able to gauge the effects upon
humans and whether or not determination takes place.
First we should say some more about the SST approach that domi-
nates these questions in the social sciences. The idea of ‘mutuality’ or
‘social shaping’ is central to the SST critique and began to be developed
in the mid-1980s when the emergence of mass-consumer computing
provoked a fresh questioning of the human–technology relationship
(e.g. Bijker et al. 1987). Judy Wajcman takes this connection up most
directly, and more recently, when she re-emphasises the SST position
that ‘technological change is a contingent and heterogeneous process
in which technology and society are mutually constituted’ (2007: 293).
This is on the face of it a fairly reasonable statement. But as a precept
it would be useful (and more acceptable) if as an element of ‘mutuality’
there were examples that show that sometimes technology can con-
stitute society in a negative way, in a way that could even be described
as determining of it. Logically, one would think, the example and out-
come of a negative process would enhance the power of the positive
argument. The point about a good deal of SST and related work is that
one confronts difficulty in finding a critique of discrete technology or
systems of technology. Mutuality is often stated, but it is always the
human who does the shaping, who dominates the process, and event-
ually achieves the ends that are positive for humans, thereby proving
their individual and social mastery over technology (e.g. Green 2002).
This is anthropocentrism, or humanism, at its most academically
seductive. Yes, they say, there are problems with the technological
society and harmful effects may come from some technologies
that are poorly or instrumentally designed. But in an ironic echo of
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 3 of 14 --
Technological determinism 147
Tim O’Reilly’s advocating of ‘collective intelligence shaping’ through
Web 2.0 (2012b), much SST research in effect argues that individuals
and society will reject the bad technologies and reshape those with
potential in ways that are more positive. This is a humanism freely
proclaimed by theorists such as Wajcman (2007: 289) and she is
blurbed for it in praise of her more recent work (2014). The problem
with humanism, however, is its species-arrogance and its roots in the
Christian and Enlightenment worldview that places humans at the top
of the ecological pile (and apart from that pile in terms of ontological
classification). Humanism and the technology relationship have more
recent and consequential pedigrees in the dogmas of twentieth-
century communism and the environmental catastrophes in the USSR
and China; this is to say nothing of liberal-capitalism’s record in this
respect. The philosopher John Gray is one who seeks to draw our
attention to the need to see our actual place in the biosphere we
share. In Straw Dogs he writes that:
Humans think they are free, conscious beings, when in truth they are
deluded animals. […] Their religions are attempts to be rid of a free-
dom they have never possessed. In the twentieth century, the utopias of
Right and Left served the same function. Today, when politics is uncon-
vincing even as entertainment, science has taken on the role of mankind’s
deliverer.
(2002: 120)
Indeed one does not need to be so philosophical about the cause
and effect of twenty-first century humanism and its confidence in sci-
ence and technology. We see a Christian- and Enlightenment-derived
ideology that finds consonance with the more workaday thinking of
Silicon Valley in technocratic libertarianism. Computers serve human
purposes, it is argued; humans also make computers ‘smart’ in order
to serve our needs. But this libertarianism goes further, towards a kind
of democracy via the marketplace where smart users, bug-fixers and
ordinary users will go on to change or fine-tune and smooth out the
rough edges of the code or the application. Determination doesn’t
come into this view, because there are people who make and there are
markets and users who shape and improve. Being naturally superior
to the technologies we produce and having social institutions such as
the market to oversee this domination means that either technolo-
gies will be rejected or they will be shaped in ways that suit us better.
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 4 of 14 --
148 The new age of digital reason
What exactly gives us this power is never discussed, but implicitly it
seems that it is a creative mix of humanism and market-forces, and
where the needs of society will find a way to prevail over any incipi-
ent determinisms in technology. Again, implicitly at least, humans are
special and our creation of tools and the shape that we collectively give
them contribute to human evolution or ‘gradual change’ which in the
SST sense invariably means ‘human progress’ (Mackenzie & Wajcman
1985: 10).We saw a good example of this as a typology in the previous
chapter in danah boyd, whose research sees kids making and shaping
social media to help them in their lives; but she also sits at the supply-
side of the technology equation by working for Microsoft.
Automation and the broken circle of action
The mutuality (which is in fact an anthropocentric humanism) that
SST sees as its ground zero for the human–technology relationship
elides a deeper-seated problem with computer technology. Previously
we touched on the idea that humans are actually dependent upon
technology – a relationship that goes back to the very origin of our
evolutionary drift as Homo sapiens.
The key to this dynamic relationship as we also saw is Gehlen’s
concept of the ‘circle of action’.This allows us to theorize the human–
technology relationship and it enables us to render as problematic
our current relationship with the specific logic and capacities of
computers. Gehlen’s circle of action enabled humans to ameliorate
the state of dependency into one that is more truly mutual – albeit
in a constantly provisional way that cannot efface our deep-down
dependency. For Gehlen, the circle of action is what enabled humans
to engage with the world and create the technologically derived
reality by means of ‘facilitation’, or the augmenting of our physical
and cognitive capacities through technique (1980: 18). Reflecting on
this Robert John wrote that:
The ‘circle of action’, or the ability to monitor the effects of our actions
and change our actions in order to achieve the desired results, com-
pensates for the lack of an immediate harmonious relationship with the
environment. Because human existence is characterised by the ‘open-
endedness of arrangements’ (Gehlen, 1980: 33) humans seek to achieve
a stable ordered existence.
(1981: 106)
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 5 of 14 --
Technological determinism 149
The achieving of desired results, however, has a cost, and this entails
the progressive narrowing, through technological development, of the
‘open-endedness of arrangements’ that would be the optimal state for
the functioning of the circle of action. To express ourselves through the
labour we expend in technology use is, for Gehlen, to at least partly
objectify that labour, and therefore to diminish a corresponding part
of human subjectivity, the realm where our autonomy and freedom
may potentially reside. Moreover, our active monitoring role of check-
ing and balancing the effects of our technology development and use
is also lessened because the objectified functions and effects of the
labour-technology process reside ‘out there’ in the world where we
have less control, individually or collectively, over them. This ‘object-
ification’ process is progressive and historically has produced three
distinct relationships between humans and technology and, as a direct
consequence, humans and nature. Gehlen (1980: 19) writes of the
relationship:
In the first, that of the tool, the physical energy necessary for labour and
the required intellectual input still depended upon the subject. In the sec-
ond, that of the machine, physical energy becomes objectified by means
of technique. Finally, in the third stage, that of automata, technical means
make dispensable input from the subject.
Gehlen argues that our ‘fascination with automatisms is a prerational
and transpractical impulse, which previously, for millennia, found
expression in magic’ (p. 14). In other words the orientation towards
automation is a rudimentary human trait and is expressed through
our ‘tendency toward facilitation’ – or the augmentation of human
power through technique and the subsequent relief from demanding
physical and cognitive effort that technique enables (p. 18). One could
deduce from this that we are fundamentally indolent, constantly look-
ing for ways to make life easier. But another way to think about it is
that to automate is also to be able to wield a certain power in nature
(and over nature). And so, functioning as a kind of ‘magic’, automation
touches that impulse that Gehlen speaks of, where machines secure
our position of supremacy in nature – the one that SST continually
revalidates – and where automation grows and improves to become
the fullest expression of human power (Ashworth 1996). This per-
spective is reflected in the broad social attitude to computing which
many see as a solution to every problem. But what we miss in this con-
fidence, both in ourselves and technology, is that the more we make
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 6 of 14 --
150 The new age of digital reason
processes automatic, the more we actually exclude ourselves from the
circle of action and, as a consequence, the more deeply automaticity
severs the link from us to technology and nature.
The concept of automation that has fired the imagination as a kind of
magical power has been with us since classical antiquity. It still resides
deep in the cultural psyche. As Arthur C. Clarke wrote a generation
ago: ‘Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from
magic’ (1973: 21). And capitalism, from the time of Jacquard and his
loom, has pursued the automation of its productive forces with implac-
able zeal. This followed the realization (beginning at least with Adam
Smith (Aspromourgos 2012: 483)) that it would be a certain path to
profitability through ‘efficiency’, where faster means cheaper and taking
the human ‘out of the loop’ – a telling computer science phrase that
is very apposite to our argument – as the optimal way to achieve this.
Historically, the arguments against automation have always resided at
the economic level of capitalism itself – concerns about the elimination
of jobs and the extinction of skills – and not as an assault upon the
fundamental human–technology relationship. However, to see comput-
ing and automation in the way we argue enables the realization that
the subject has become incredibly vulnerable – a susceptibility that
grows in proportion to the scale and ubiquity of these processes in
our world. Automated computing, we must remember, is no longer
primarily engineered for the processing for us of the dull and rou-
tine administrative tasks that were its 1960s raison d’être. In our Web
2.0 postmodernity, computing is engineered precisely to not leave us
alone, somewhere safely out of the loop, but to exploit that susceptible
isolation, to ‘reach out’ to us as Robert MacBride noted (1967: 4), and
to persistently ‘speak to our vulnerabilities’ as Sherry Turkle added
(2011: 230) because computing is oriented almost wholly towards the
needs of capitalism.
In summary: We have always been dependent upon technology.
Something like mutuality occurred in Gehlen’s circle of action where, in
the earliest phase of our species’ emergence as tool-using creatures,
a tentative stability in the relationship could be said to have existed.
However, as machines began to create the basis for our modern world,
they also diminished our role by objectifying the human labour power
that was a key element of the technology relationship. Machines of
increasing precision and power also made capitalism possible, and the
dialectic began to change from that between human and technology
to that between technology and efficiency. With automation emerging
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 7 of 14 --
Technological determinism 151
as the inevitable outcome of capitalist competition in commodity pro-
duction, the loop within which we began our ancient journey with
technology closes to us still further. Today it is our vulnerability to
automated networked systems, an autonomous logic and system that
cannot ignore us, that places us at the threshold of what might be more
properly termed network determinism. This is a postmodern form of
technological determinism in that it feels so natural that it appears that
we express our free will in our networked lives. But this principally is
the power of automation. It is the exercise of ‘magic’ upon ‘facilitation’.
It is a force that has a kind of awing quality, so much so that it seems
to effortlessly come to us, effacing, seemingly, our dependency (because
it’s now automatic). Moreover, it enhances the feeling that we must be
shaping this network to our needs and wants, because we are the users
and it does not feel like we are being forced (much) into anything – so
how can it be ‘determining’?
Network determinism: accept cookies?
In November 1994 Microsoft launched a global advertising campaign
titled ‘Where do you want to go today?’ for its new Windows software.
Microsoft was then at the forefront of the massification of personal
computers and it was also at the forefront of the hyperbole that was
beginning to fuel a tech bubble that would pop a few years hence. Their
flagship ad, still viewable on YouTube and elsewhere online, looks dull
and clunky today, but the intent then was to inspire a sense of global
freedom for the user where the world was opening up to all kinds of
new experience, virtual places and virtual people for you to discover,
with Microsoft supplying the digital vehicle to take you there. The
choice is yours. As we saw earlier, however, around 1994 choices were
in fact very limited. Connection speeds were slow and unreliable, and
the software itself was not quite sure what its point was: was it a busi-
ness tool, was it for research or was it for fun? Users were working it
out for themselves at this still analogue-inflected stage, and doing it in
ways that left the internet start-up companies that helped inflate the
bubble spectacularly wrong about where they thought people might
actually want to go. The late twentieth-century network was unable to
determine very much.
Post-crash, twenty-first-century Web 2.0, however, was able to
answer the question that Microsoft posed, and the answer was not
a multiple-choice one but a pre-determined (or default) answer, which
was that the user had to go in the direction of the digital marketplace,
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 8 of 14 --
152 The new age of digital reason
to businesses with goods and services to sell, and for ‘content’ to be
created by millions of users from whom businesses could either buy
or appropriate; it was either that, or they could not have a cheap and
fast and ubiquitous network at all (Fuchs 2014: 51–65). Disingenuously
or not, Microsoft was asking the wrong question in 1994. By providing
the new determinedly business orientation, Web 2.0 asked the only
question and provided the only possible answer. The new internet fun-
damentally shifted the orientation of users’ experience. What many
called ‘true interactivity’ was in fact a networked capitalism coming for
you. The ideological manoeuvre was critical and it was camouflaged as
‘efficiency’ and ‘connectivity’ and simplicity itself; and with the burgeon-
ing of social media and the app economy as unanticipated consequences,
a dense commercial interactivity of goods and services – and ready
credit for millions – had never been so close and so easy. The new
internet seemed to open up all kinds of possibility. A key objective for
making the internet work second time around was, as Tim O’Reilly and
John Battelle (2009) put it, ‘once-difficult tasks become automated’.
Once this had spread far enough (and it still spreads every day) then
a certain deterministic logic began to assert itself. Automated digital
networks now had the capacity to conceive, signpost and direct where
we ‘go’ in our networked lives. But is this really ‘determinism’ and, if so,
what kind is it?
In an essay titled ‘A Life Lived in Media’, Mark Deuze et al. proffer
an answer, one that is avowedly determinist, though not exactly in the
sense that we mean. They write: ‘media […] make us lose ourselves
[…] in our technology to the extent that it generates our lives on
the basis of a specific set of rules, codes and protocols’ (2012: 2).
What this suggests is a process of pre-programmed automaticity;
having our analogue essence coded, being ourselves programmed and
fashioned as automatons in the manner of Hofkirchner’s Salzburg
determinism. Again, this is to over-determine determinism and so
neglect the changes in the human–technology relationship that is at
the heart of what network determinism is able to enact in us. We are
not and could never foreseeably be autonomic – this is science fiction.
Our analogue essence lies in our relation to nature; it is biological,
not digital, and although it is certainly suppressible it is ultimately
in eradicable. What is to be done? As Bruno Latour suggests, we must
think and act ‘beyond the dichotomies of man and nature, subject and
object, modes of production and the environment’ (2004: 1). The aim,
which is a political one, is to break through those dichotomies that are
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 9 of 14 --
Technological determinism 153
artificially reinforced by networked automation and that leave us vul-
nerable and growingly isolated (‘alone together’ in Turkle’s excellent
description).
The political dimension of the network society is to us a key one, and
in Chapter 10 we discuss in some detail the travails of the political in our
digital age. For now it may be insightful to bring the shaping of the political
subject within the neoliberal and networked context to the fore – and
to consider the effects of the new power of digital technologies over
networked lives. A central principle of both classic liberalism and neolib-
eralism is the autonomy of the individual. During the 1980s British Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher spearheaded the neoliberal revolution at
the popular-political level. For Thatcher, society was ideally comprised
of ‘individual men and women, and […] families’ acting as the very bed-
rock of the free society. She was also fond of thinking of politics at the
‘household level’ as she termed it, where in the home political economy
merged with the moral economy, to produce the liberal individual as
the basic unit of society. A concomitant of this is that of privacy – the
right of the free individual to be left alone by the state. However, as
Hannah Arendt, quoted in Dawes (2014), has argued, the classical liberal
conceptions of privacy, of autonomy and individuality, are abstractions
that serve to separate people from public life (the polis or res publica)
and from other individuals. The term ‘privacy’, she reminds us, ‘meant
literally being deprived of something’ (Arendt, cited in Dawes 2014: 32).
The private realm where a person was able to be authentically individual
was, since the time of the Romans, intended only to be a ‘temporary ref-
uge from the business of res publica’ (ibid.). Modern notions of privacy,
she notes (writing in 1958), had become ‘sharply opposed to the social
realm’ (ibid.). Extending Arendt’s thesis to our postmodern age, the
more individual we become, and the more we fetishize the concepts of
privacy, then the more we withdraw from, or are drawn away from, an
active and participatory political life. With the supposed naturalness of
people wishing to follow their own interests first, we find a correspond-
ing individualism and a sanctification of the private sphere that finds its
postmodern articulation in neoliberal globalization. To the extent that
these abstractions actually exist they constitute an autonomous indi-
vidualism made possible by information technologies. Arendt’s theory
of ‘deprivation’ is useful for those who would seek a disconnected and
pliant citizenry. To anaesthetize this deprivation with the ideology of
‘individualism’, together with the easements of the consumer society,
and the legislated ‘protection’ of our private online data, is not only to
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 10 of 14 --
154 The new age of digital reason
create weaker political subjects, but also – as lone users gazing into a
screen – to increase our vulnerability to networked computing.
For the generation of the 1980s and 1990s the introduction of com-
puting to the workplace was a fait accompli. Not many then demanded
email, or queued to learn new-fangled applications, or suggested that
workplace-connected computers be allowed to colonize the privacy
of their home. It was a sign of our collective political weakness that
our digital future contained so little popular involvement. We went
along with it and soon we couldn’t imagine life without computers.
As in so many other realms the needs of business trumped any social
and cultural considerations. A political ‘lack’ that merged with a grow-
ing technological ‘lack’ brought about by automation, ensured that our
exposure to the logic of digital capitalism left the ‘individual’ at a clear
disadvantage.
The determinism of the network is not primarily a particulariza-
tion of the effect of computers, but rather a generalized orientation
towards commercialism and the widening sphere of digital capitalism.
It is an orientation towards infantilization by apps that fill our non-
working time with mindlessness or frustration; an orientation towards
a life spent ‘naturally’ as a consumer or client or user; an orientation
towards the expectation of an immediacy in all things digitally gener-
ated, an expectation that would have been unimaginable (and often
morally and ethically questionable) in our analogue world; an orienta-
tion towards the cash nexus that shadows every connection and every
relationship; an orientation towards advertising everywhere we look,
and advertising itself being a natural and taken-for-granted presence
in all realms of network life and beyond. These are broad orientations
that describe aspects of a network-determining life and are by no
means exhaustive. Examples continue to proliferate in proportion to
the growth and sophistication of a network engineered to serve com-
modity production, both informational and traditional.
The 1994 Microsoft slogan ‘Where do you want to go today?’ did,
after a fashion, and with lip service or not, ‘exalt’ the consumer as an
individual who has choices to make and the agency to make them.
Today Apple Inc., now the most powerful and profitable seller of com-
puter products, feels no such obligation. In 2011 the slogan for one
of its flagship products, iCloud, where the user can remotely store
data from their computer, was: ‘This is the cloud the way it should be:
automatic and effortless.’ Gone is any perceived need to blandish the
user about freedom and choice. Indeed, with the further separation
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 11 of 14 --
Technological determinism 155
of the user from his or her work and life, any concept of digital life
as a kind of open-ended journey or unfolding project is no longer
worthy of consideration or even pretence. This is because there is no
longer any need to tempt users to the network – we do not have a
choice. What is promoted is simply ‘efficiency’ in life and in business,
and there’s hardly any difference between these any more. We must
all be ‘efficient’ and, even though we cannot recognize its analogue in
nature, iCloud, despite its name, we must take on trust as a vague
kind of magic provided to help us. It’s automatic and it’s effortless and
therefore, as the history of our relationship with technology since
Jacquard’s loom shows, it must therefore be progress and it must
therefore be good.
The network determines us in particular ways too, though these are
even more subtle, even more psychological, and their growing com-
plexity and finesse act as the ultimately determining tools that are the
Holy Grail for those like O’Reilly who see capitalism and people as
finding their quintessence only in the networked computer. Much has
been written recently about algorithmic computing. Eli Pariser caused
a small storm in internet circles in 2010 with his book The Filter Bubble.
In it he showed how Google’s algorithmic software monitors user
behaviour through more than 50 different digital sensors to build a
profile of the user’s wants, needs, interests, patterns of buying and so
on – this number has doubtlessly increased. It is the user profile that
enables Google to exist; it constitutes the value that it attracts adver-
tisers with. Pariser’s experiments showed that Google’s search engines
tailor their suggestions in response to all queries, including those that
have political aspects. He showed, for example, that if a user’s search
pattern indicates she has left-leaning (as profiled by the algorithm)
views and interests, Google will ‘personalize’ her search results to
show sites that would fit with her political profile. This has obvious
consequences for the necessary unfettered exposure to a diversity of
political opinion that is the basis of the democratic process. However,
techno-enthusiasts, and even those more sceptical theorists, like to
argue that Google actually provides a useful service; making use of
an otherwise chaotic internet and its clever algorithms are able to
give you what you want, like and expect. What Google calls ‘person-
alization’, no matter the extent of it – and this has been debated
in the wake of Pariser’s book by theorists such as Jonathan Zittrain
(see Weisberg 2011) – constitutes a form of determinism. The indi-
vidual as user is cut out of the decision-making process and it is the
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 12 of 14 --
156 The new age of digital reason
algorithm that ‘anticipates’ the user, creating what Cass Sunstein had
earlier identified as the ‘echo-chamber effect’ (2001). This is where, in
your daily information diet in politics, in news, in arts and entertain-
ment, etc., there will be fewer surprises, less to upset or unnerve or
to take one outside one’s comfort zone, or to give cause to reflect
upon a subject or an issue through exposure to differing perspectives
or arguments. This is determinism because the worldview becomes
inevitably narrowed. It does so not because of any political conspiracy
or market ideology, but as an unintended effect of pervasive automa-
tion oriented towards market efficiency. It does so through a network
model dominated by commercial imperatives that determine that any
other outcome in the filtering process of information production and
consumption is highly unlikely because, to be itself ‘efficient’, the net-
work and its advertising needs specifically to target you.
What we describe as networked determinism thus becomes the
sum of our postmodern vulnerabilities. Living inside the network
we are outside the growingly automated circle of action where our
labour, our sociality and our political practices become objectified
and commodified. Immersed and isolated in ubiquitous automation
we make relatively easy subjects (and targets) for determination. This
is not to be automated according to the ‘codes and protocols’ of
computers, but to follow where these codes and protocols lead: to be
oriented in our billions to the commodified virtual spaces on network
capitalism that were unimaginable to most of us even a decade ago.
To argue that this greatest ever migration of humanity to the same
places for largely the same reasons is a form of ‘mutual constitution’
in our relationship with technology is itself a kind of science fiction, a
particularly unimaginative kind at that, which says nothing about the
potential of humans or technologies beyond the banalities of a digital
capitalism whose logic is singular and is rendering us and our techno-
logical futures singular as well.
We are not automata. We have, however, been left isolated and
exposed to a logic that is antithetical to our analogue essence.
Automation denies us our ancient and active role with technology
and the mutualistic dimensions of ‘facilitation’ that enabled our sur-
vival as a species and, more, the ability to create cultures, civilizations
and, since the eighteenth century, forms of modernity which lasted
until only recently. This determinism is more like a form of oppression,
because its root causes lie in political choices made in the 1970s and
1980s to solve economic crises. Political choices to solve economic
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 13 of 14 --
Technological determinism 157
problems brought computers from the university and military labs to
the masses. It is therefore to politics that we must look for solutions
to the oppression of automation. Media and politics will take up a
good deal of the rest of the book. In Chapter 10 we will consider
their digitally derived problematic in the context of democracy as
being essentially a modern and analogue process in a postmodern and
digital world. In the final chapter we will focus these broad arguments
to questions of temporality and ethics to show how and why we must
reconnect with the dynamics of technological development and of the
natural world that formed the human–technology relationship that has
become estranged.
But to continue: the nature of our transformed politics is central if
we as individuals as part of a polity wish to find the keys to unlock our
digital cage. But politics is communication, and communication through
technology, as we saw in Chapter 1, is mediation. And networked dig-
ital communication as the means of expressing ourselves as active
and positive political beings, as this chapter would suggest, is difficult.
Nonetheless, to enable us to think more clearly about remedies for
the postmodern political malaise, we need first to consider the digitally
derived symptoms of our global media society.
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:14 16 January 2017
-- 14 of 14 --