I. The Significance of Architecture
1.
A terraced house on a tree-lined street. Earlier today, the house rang with the sound of
children’s cries and adult voices, but since the last occupant took oϱ (with her satchel) a
few hours ago, it has been left to sample the morning by itself. The sun has risen over the
gables of the buildings opposite and now washes through the ground-ϩoor windows,
painting the interior walls a buttery yellow and warming the grainy-red brick façade.
Within shafts of sunlight, platelets of dust move as if in obedience to the rhythms of a silent
waltz. From the hallway, the low murmur of accelerating traϫc can be detected a few
blocks away. Occasionally, the letter-box opens with a rasp to admit a plaintive leaflet.
The house gives signs of enjoying the emptiness. It is rearranging itself after the night,
clearing its pipes and cracking its joints. This digniϧed and seasoned creature, with its
coppery veins and wooden feet nestled in a bed of clay, has endured much: balls bounced
against its garden ϩanks, doors slammed in rage, headstands attempted along its corridors,
the weight and sighs of electrical equipment and the probings of inexperienced plumbers
-- 1 of 41 --
into its innards. A family of four shelters in it, joined by a colony of ants around the
foundations and, in spring time, by broods of robins in the chimney stack. It also lends a
shoulder to a frail (or just indolent) sweet-pea which leans against the garden wall,
indulging the peripatetic courtship of a circle of bees.
The house has grown into a knowledgeable witness. It has been party to early seductions,
it has watched homework being written, it has observed swaddled babies freshly arrived
from hospital, it has been surprised in the middle of the night by whispered conferences in
the kitchen. It has experienced winter evenings when its windows were as cold as bags of
frozen peas and midsummer dusks when its brick walls held the warmth of newly baked
bread.
It has provided not only physical but also psychological sanctuary. It has been a guardian
of identity. Over the years, its owners have returned from periods away and, on looking
around them, remembered who they were. The ϩagstones on the ground ϩoor speak of
serenity and aged grace, while the regularity of the kitchen cabinets oϱers a model of
unintimidating order and discipline. The dining table, with its waxy tablecloth printed with
large buttercups, suggests a burst of playfulness which is thrown into relief by a sterner
concrete wall nearby. Along the stairs, small still-lives of eggs and lemons draw attention to
the intricacy and beauty of everyday things. On a ledge beneath a window, a glass jar of
cornϩowers helps to resist the pull towards dejection. On the upper ϩoor, a narrow empty
room allows space for restorative thoughts to hatch, its skylight giving out onto impatient
clouds migrating rapidly over cranes and chimney pots.
Although this house may lack solutions to a great many of its occupants’ ills, its rooms
nevertheless give evidence of a happiness to which architecture has made its distinctive
contribution.
2.
Yet a concern for architecture has never been free from a degree of suspicion. Doubts have
been raised about the subject’s seriousness, its moral worth and its cost. A thought-
provoking number of the world’s most intelligent people have disdained any interest in
decoration and design, equating contentment with discarnate and invisible matters instead.
The Ancient Greek Stoic philosopher Epictetus is said to have demanded of a heart-
broken friend whose house had burnt to the ground, ‘If you really understand what governs
the universe, how can you yearn for bits of stone and pretty rock?’ (It is unclear how much
longer the friendship lasted.) Legend recounts that after hearing the voice of God, the
Christian hermit Alexandra sold her house, shut herself in a tomb and never looked at the
outside world again, while her fellow hermit Paul of Scete slept on a blanket on the ϩoor of
a windowless mud hut and recited 300 prayers every day, suϱering only when he heard of
another holy man who had managed 700 and slept in a coffin.
Such austerity has been a historical constant. In the spring of 1137 the Cistercian monk
St Bernard of Clairvaux travelled all the way around Lake Geneva without noticing it was
even there. Likewise, after four years in his monastery, St Bernard could not report whether
the dining area had a vaulted ceiling (it does) or how many windows there were in the
sanctuary of his church (three). On a visit to the Charterhouse of Dauphiné, St Bernard
astonished his hosts by arriving on a magniϧcent white horse diametrically opposed to the
-- 2 of 41 --
ascetic values he professed, but he explained that he had borrowed the animal from a
wealthy uncle and had simply failed to register its appearance on a four-day journey across
France.
3.
Nevertheless, such determined eϱorts to scorn visual experience have always been matched
by equally persistent attempts to mould the material world to graceful ends. People have
strained their backs carving ϩowers into their roof beams and their eyesight embroidering
animals onto their tablecloths. They have given up weekends to hide unsightly cables
behind ledges. They have thought carefully about appropriate kitchen work-surfaces. They
have imagined living in unattainably expensive houses pictured in magazines and then felt
sad, as one does on passing an attractive stranger in a crowded street.
We seem divided between an urge to override our senses and numb ourselves to our
settings and a contradictory impulse to acknowledge the extent to which our identities are
indelibly connected to, and will shift along with, our locations. An ugly room can coagulate
any loose suspicions as to the incompleteness of life, while a sun-lit one set with honey-
coloured limestone tiles can lend support to whatever is most hopeful within us.
Belief in the signiϧcance of architecture is premised on the notion that we are, for better
or for worse, diϱerent people in diϱerent places – and on the conviction that it is
architecture’s task to render vivid to us who we might ideally be.
4.
We are sometimes eager to celebrate the inϩuence of our surroundings. In the living room
of a house in the Czech Republic, we see an example of how walls, chairs and ϩoors can
combine to create an atmosphere in which the best sides of us are oϱered the opportunity
to flourish. We accept with gratitude the power that a single room can possess.
But sensitivity to architecture also has its more problematic aspects. If one room can alter
how we feel, if our happiness can hang on the colour of the walls or the shape of a door,
what will happen to us in most of the places we are forced to look at and inhabit? What
will we experience in a house with prison-like windows, stained carpet tiles and plastic
curtains?
It is to prevent the possibility of permanent anguish that we can be led to shut our eyes
to most of what is around us, for we are never far from damp stains and cracked ceilings,
shattered cities and rusting dockyards. We can’t remain sensitive indeϧnitely to
environments which we don’t have the means to alter for the good – and end up as
conscious as we can aϱord to be. Echoing the attitude of Stoic philosophers or St Bernard
around Lake Geneva, we may ϧnd ourselves arguing that, ultimately, it doesn’t much
matter what buildings look like, what is on the ceiling or how the wall is treated –
professions of detachment that stem not so much from an insensitivity to beauty as from a
desire to deϩect the sadness we would face if we left ourselves open to all of beauty’s many
absences.
-- 3 of 41 --
Architecture can render vivid to us who we might ideally be:
Mies van der Rohe, dining area, Tugendhat House, Brno, 1930
5.
There is no shortage of reasons to be suspicious of the ambition to create great architecture.
Buildings rarely make palpable the eϱorts that their construction demands. They are coyly
silent about the bankruptcies, the delays, the fear and the dust that they impose. A
nonchalant appearance is a frequent feature of their charm. It is only when we try our own
hand at construction that we are initiated into the torments associated with persuading
materials and other humans to cooperate with our designs, with ensuring that two pieces of
glass will be joined in a neat line, that a lamp will hang symmetrically over the stairs, that
a boiler will light up when it should or that concrete pillars will marry a roof without
complaint.
Even when we have attained our goals, our buildings have a grievous tendency to fall
apart again with precipitate speed. It can be hard to walk into a freshly decorated house
without feeling pre-emptively sad at the decay impatiently waiting to begin: how soon the
walls will crack, the white cupboards will yellow and the carpets stain. The ruins of the
Ancient World oϱer a mocking lesson for anyone waiting for builders to ϧnish their work.
How proud the householders of Pompeii must have been.
In his essay ‘On Transience’ (1916) Sigmund Freud recalled a walk he took in the
Dolomite Mountains with the poet Rainer Maria Rilke. It was an exquisite summer’s day;
the flowers were in bloom and brightly coloured butterflies danced above the meadows. The
psychoanalyst was glad to be outdoors (it had been raining all week), but his companion
walked with his head bowed, his eyes ϧxed on the ground, and remained taciturn
throughout the excursion. It wasn’t that Rilke was oblivious to the beauty around him; he
simply could not overlook how impermanent everything was. In Freud’s words, he was
unable to forget ‘that all this beauty was fated to extinction, that it would vanish when
-- 4 of 41 --
winter came, like all human beauty and all the beauty that men have created or may
create’.
Freud was unsympathetic; for him, the capacity to love anything attractive, however
fragile it might be, was a hallmark of psychological health. But Rilke’s stance, though
inconvenient, helpfully emphasises how it can be those most in thrall to beauty who will be
especially aware of, and saddened by, its ephemeral character. Such melancholic
enthusiasts will see the moth hole beneath the curtain swatch and the ruin beneath the
plan. They may at the last moment cancel an appointment with an estate agent, having
realised that the house under oϱer, as well as the city and even civilisation itself, will soon
enough be reduced to fragments of shattered brick over which cockroaches will
triumphantly crawl. They may prefer to rent a room or live in a barrel out of a reluctance
to contemplate the slow disintegration of the objects of their love.
At its apex, a passion for architecture may turn us into aesthetes, eccentric ϧgures who
must watch over their houses with the vigilance of museum guards, patrolling their rooms
in search of stains, a damp cloth or sponge in hand. Aesthetes will have no choice but to
forgo the company of small children and, during dinner with friends, will have to ignore
the conversation in order to focus on whether someone might lean back and inadvertently
leave a head-shaped imprint on the wall.
It would be pleasant to refuse in a muscular spirit to lend stray blemishes genuine
signiϧcance. However, aesthetes force us to consider whether happiness may not sometimes
turn on the presence or absence of a ϧngerprint, whether in certain situations beauty and
ugliness may not lie only a few millimetres apart, whether a single mark might not wreck a
wall or an errant brush stroke undo a landscape painting. We should thank these sensitive
spirits for pointing us with theatrical honesty towards the possibility of a genuine antithesis
between competing values: for example, an attachment to beautiful architecture and the
pursuit of an exuberant and affectionate family life.
How wise were the ancient philosophers in suggesting that we exclude from our vision of
contentment anything that might one day be covered by lava or blow down in a hurricane,
succumb to a chocolate smear or absorb a wine stain.
6.
Architecture is perplexing, too, in how inconsistent is its capacity to generate the happiness
on which its claim to our attention is founded. While an attractive building may on
occasion ϩatter an ascending mood, there will be times when the most congenial of
locations will be unable to dislodge our sadness or misanthropy.
We can feel anxious and envious even though the ϩoor we’re standing on has been
imported from a remote quarry, and ϧnely sculpted window frames have been painted a
soothing grey. Our inner metronome can be unimpressed by the eϱorts of workmen to
create a fountain or nurture a symmetrical line of oak trees. We can fall into a petty
argument which ends in threats of divorce in a building by Geoϱrey Bawa or Louis Kahn.
Houses can invite us to join them in a mood which we ϧnd ourselves incapable of
summoning. The noblest architecture can sometimes do less for us than a siesta or an
aspirin.
Those who have made architectural beauty their life’s work know only too well how
-- 5 of 41 --
futile their eϱorts can prove. After an exhaustive study of the buildings of Venice, in a
moment of depressive lucidity, John Ruskin acknowledged that few Venetians in fact
seemed elevated by their city, perhaps the most beautiful urban tapestry in the world.
Alongside St Mark’s Church (described by Ruskin in The Stones of Venice as ‘a Book of
Common Prayer, a vast illuminated missal, bound with alabaster instead of parchment,
studded with porphyry pillars instead of jewels, and written within and without in letters of
enamel and gold’), they sat in cafés, read the papers, sunbathed, bickered and stole from
one another as, high on the church’s roof, unobserved, ‘the images of Christ and His angels
looked down upon them.’
Endowed with a power that is as unreliable as it often is inexpressible, architecture will
always compete poorly with utilitarian demands for humanity’s resources. How hard it is to
make a case for the cost of tearing down and rebuilding a mean but serviceable street. How
awkward to have to defend, in the face of more tangible needs, the beneϧts of realigning a
crooked lamppost or replacing an ill-matched window frame. Beautiful architecture has
none of the unambiguous advantages of a vaccine or a bowl of rice. Its construction will
hence never be raised to a dominant political priority, for even if the whole of the man-
made world could, through relentless eϱort and sacriϧce, be modelled to rival St Mark’s
Square, even if we could spend the rest of our lives in the Villa Rotonda or the Glass House,
we would still often be in a bad mood.
7.
Not only do beautiful houses falter as guarantors of happiness, they can also be accused of
failing to improve the characters of those who live in them.
It seems reasonable to suppose that people will possess some of the qualities of the
buildings they are drawn to: to expect that if they are alive to the charm of an ancient
farmhouse with walls made of irregular chiselled stones set in light mortar, if they can
appreciate the play of candlelight against hand-decorated tiles, can be seduced by libraries
with shelves ϧlled from ϩoor to ceiling with books that emit a sweet dusty smell and are
content to lie on the ϩoor tracing the knotted border of an intricate Turkoman rug, then
they will know something about patience and stability, tenderness and sweetness,
intelligence and worldliness, scepticism and trust. We expect that such enthusiasts will be
committed to infusing their whole lives with the values embodied in the objects of their
appreciation.
But, whatever the theoretical aϫnities between beauty and goodness, it is undeniable
that, in practice, farmhouses and lodges, mansions and riverside apartments have played
host to innumerous tyrants and murderers, sadists and snobs, to characters with a chilling
indiϱerence to the disjunctures between the qualities manifested in their surroundings and
in their lives.
-- 6 of 41 --
We would still often be in a bad mood:
Philip Johnson, The Glass House, New Canaan, Connecticut, 1949
Medieval devotional paintings may try to remind us of sadness and sin, they may seek to
train us away from arrogance and worldly pursuits and render us properly humble before
the mysteries and hardships of life, but they will hang in a living room without active
protest while butlers circulate the finger food and butchers plot their next move.
Architecture may well possess moral messages; it simply has no power to enforce them. It
oϱers suggestions instead of making laws. It invites, rather than orders, us to emulate its
spirit and cannot prevent its own abuse.
We should be kind enough not to blame buildings for our own failure to honour the
advice they can only ever subtly proffer.
8.
Suspicion of architecture may in the end be said to centre around the modesty of the claims
that can realistically be made on its behalf. Reverence for beautiful buildings does not seem
a high ambition on which to pin our hopes for happiness, at least when compared with the
results we might associate with untying a scientiϧc knot or falling in love, amassing a
fortune or initiating revolution. To care deeply about a ϧeld that achieves so little, and yet
consumes so many of our resources, forces us to admit to a disturbing, even degrading lack
of aspiration.
In its ineϱectiveness, architecture shares in the bathos of gardening: an interest in door
handles or ceiling mouldings can seem no less worthy of mockery than a concern for the
progress of rose or lavender bushes. It is forgivable to conclude that there must be grander
causes to which human beings might devote themselves.
However, after coming up against some of the sterner setbacks which bedevil emotional
-- 7 of 41 --
and political life, we may well arrive at a more charitable assessment of the signiϧcance of
beauty – of islands of perfection, in which we can ϧnd an echo of an ideal which we once
hoped to lay a permanent claim to. Life may have to show itself to us in some of its
authentically tragic colours before we can begin to grow properly visually responsive to its
subtler oϱerings, whether in the form of a tapestry or a Corinthian column, a slate tile or a
lamp. It tends not to be young couples in love who stop to admire a weathered brick wall
or the descent of a banister towards a hallway, a disregard for such circumscribed beauty
being a corollary of an optimistic belief in the possibility of attaining a more visceral,
definitive variety of happiness.
The moral ineffectiveness of a beautiful house:
Hermann Göring (in white) at home with the French Ambassador and, to the right, Generals Vuillemin and Milch. In the
background, Saints Margarethe and Dorothea, German (fifteenth century), and Lucretia (1532) by Lucas Cranach
We may need to have made an indelible mark on our lives, to have married the wrong
person, pursued an unfulϧlling career into middle age or lost a loved one before
architecture can begin to have any perceptible impact on us, for when we speak of being
‘moved’ by a building, we allude to a bitter-sweet feeling of contrast between the noble
qualities written into a structure and the sadder wider reality within which we know them
to exist. A lump rises in our throat at the sight of beauty from an implicit knowledge that
the happiness it hints at is the exception.
In his memoirs, the German theologian Paul Tillich explained that art had always left
him cold as a pampered and trouble-free young man, despite the best pedagogical eϱorts of
his parents and teachers. Then the First World War broke out, he was called up and, in a
period of leave from his battalion (three quarters of whose members would be killed in the
course of the conϩict), he found himself in the Kaiser Friedrich Museum in Berlin during a
rain storm. There, in a small upper gallery, he came across Sandro Botticelli’s Madonna and
-- 8 of 41 --
Child with Eight Singing Angels and, on meeting the wise, fragile, compassionate gaze of the
Virgin, surprised himself by beginning to sob uncontrollably. He experienced what he
described as a moment of ‘revelatory ecstasy’, tears welling up in his eyes at the disjunction
between the exceptionally tender atmosphere of the picture and the barbarous lessons he
had learnt in the trenches.
Life is not usually like this:
Ken Shuttleworth, Crescent House, Wiltshire, 1997
-- 9 of 41 --
Sandro Botticelli, Madonna and Child with Eight Singing Angels, 1477
It is in dialogue with pain that many beautiful things acquire their value. Acquaintance
with grief turns out to be one of the more unusual prerequisites of architectural
appreciation. We might, quite aside from all other requirements, need to be a little sad
before buildings can properly touch us.
9.
Taking architecture seriously therefore makes some singular and strenuous demands upon
us. It requires that we open ourselves to the idea that we are aϱected by our surroundings
even when they are made of vinyl and would be expensive and time-consuming to
ameliorate. It means conceding that we are inconveniently vulnerable to the colour of our
wallpaper and that our sense of purpose may be derailed by an unfortunate bedspread. At
the same time, it means acknowledging that buildings are able to solve no more than a
fraction of our dissatisfactions or prevent evil from unfolding under their watch.
Architecture, even at its most accomplished, will only ever constitute a small, and imperfect
(expensive, prone to destruction and morally unreliable), protest against the state of things.
More awkwardly still, architecture asks us to imagine that happiness might often have an
unostentatious, unheroic character to it, that it might be found in a run of old ϩoorboards
or in a wash of morning light over a plaster wall – in undramatic, frangible scenes of
beauty that move us because we are aware of the darker backdrop against which they are
set.
10.
-- 10 of 41 --
But if we accept the legitimacy of the subject nevertheless, then a new and contentious
series of questions at once opens up. We have to confront the vexed point on which so
much of the history of architecture pivots. We have to ask what exactly a beautiful building
might look like.
Ludwig Wittgenstein, having abandoned academia for three years in order to construct a
house for his sister Gretl in Vienna, understood the magnitude of the challenge. ‘You think
philosophy is diϫcult,’ observed the author of the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, ‘but I tell
you, it is nothing compared to the difficulty of being a good architect.’
-- 11 of 41 --
II. In What Style Shall We Build?
1.
What is a beautiful building? To be modern is to experience this as an awkward and
possibly unanswerable question, the very notion of beauty having come to seem like a
concept doomed to ignite unfruitful and childish argument. How can anyone claim to know
what is attractive? How can anyone adjudicate between the competing claims of diϱerent
styles or defend a particular choice in the face of the contradictory tastes of others? The
creation of beauty, once viewed as the central task of the architect, has quietly evaporated
from serious professional discussion and retreated to a confused private imperative.
2.
It wasn’t always thought so hard to know how to build beautifully. For over a thousand
discontinuous years in the history of the West, a beautiful building was synonymous with a
Classical building, a structure with a temple front, decorated columns, repeated ratios and a
symmetrical façade.
-- 12 of 41 --
The Greeks gave birth to the Classical style, the Romans copied and developed it, and,
after a gap of a thousand years, the educated classes of Renaissance Italy rediscovered it.
From the peninsula, Classicism spread north and west, it took on local accents and was
articulated in new materials. Classical buildings appeared as far apart as Helsinki and
Budapest, Savannah and St Petersburg. The sensibility was applied to interiors, to Classical
chairs and ceilings, beds and baths.
Alhough it is the diϱerences between varieties of Classicism that have tended to interest
historians most, it is the similarities that are ultimately more striking. For hundreds of years
there was near unanimity about how to construct a window or a door, how to fashion
columns and pedimented fronts, how to relate rooms to hallways and how to model
ironwork and mouldings – assumptions codiϧed by Renaissance scholar-architects and
popularised in pattern books for ordinary builders.
Rules for Classical columns:
Architectural plate from Denis Diderot, editor, Encyclopédie, 1780
-- 13 of 41 --
A city-wide consensus about beauty:
John Wood the Elder, north side, Queen Square, Bath, 1736
The Arch of Constantine, Rome, c. AD 315
Robert Adam, rear elevation, Kedleston Hall, 1765
So strong was this consensus that whole cities achieved a stylistic unity that stretched
across successions of squares and avenues. An aesthetic language dating back to the Temple
of Apollo at Delphi ended up gracing the family homes of Edinburgh accountants and
-- 14 of 41 --
Philadelphia lawyers.
Few Classical architects or their clients felt any impulse towards originality Fidelity to the
canon was what mattered; repetition was the norm. When Robert Adam designed Kedleston
Hall (1765), it was a point of pride for him to embed an exact reproduction of the Arch of
Constantine (c. 315) in the middle of the rear elevation. Thomas Hamilton’s High School in
Edinburgh (1825), though it was made of sombre grey Craigleith sandstone, sat under
sepulchral Scottish skies and had steel beams supporting its roof, was lauded for the skill
with which it imitated the form of the Doric Temple of the Parthenon in Athens (c. 438 BC).
Thomas Jeϱerson’s campus for the University of Virginia, in Charlottesville (1826), quoted
without shame from the Roman Temple of Fortuna Virilis (c. 100 BC) and the Baths of
Diocletian (AD 302), while Joseph Hansom’s new town hall in Birmingham (1832) was a
faithful adaptation, set down in the middle of an industrial city, of the Roman Maison
Carrée at Nîmes (c. AD 130).
Maison Carrée, Nîmes, c. AD 130
Joseph Hansom, Town Hall, Birmingham, 1832
Thus large parts of the man-made world in the early-modern period would not, in their
outward appearance at least, have shaken many of the architectural assumptions of a
magically resurrected contemporary of the Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius.
-- 15 of 41 --
3.
When it came to simpler, cheaper houses, there was again a consensus about the most
ϧtting way to build, though here the canon was the result not of any common cultural
vision but of a host of limitations.
Foremost among these was climate, which, in the absence of aϱordable technology to
resist it, usually dictated an austere menu of options for how most sensibly to put up a wall,
pitch a roof or render a façade. The expense of transporting materials over any signiϧcant
distance likewise limited stylistic choice, forcing the majority of householders to settle
uncomplainingly for available stone, wood or mud. The diϫculties of travel also hindered
the spread of knowledge about alternative building methods. Printing costs meant that few
ever saw so much as a picture of how houses looked in other parts of the world (which
explains why, in so much of early northern religious art, Jesus is born in what appears to
be a chalet).
Limitations bred strong local architectural identities. Within a certain radius, houses
would uniformly be constructed of a particular native material, which would cede its
ubiquity to another on the opposite side of a river or a mountain range. An ordinary
Kentish house could thus be distinguished at a glance from a Cornish one, or a farm in the
Jura from one in the Engadine. In most areas, houses continued to be built as they had
always been built, using whatever was around, with an absence of aesthetic self-
consciousness, with their owners’ modest pride at being able to aϱord shelter in the ϧrst
place.
4.
Then, in the spring of 1747, an effeminate young man with a taste for luxury, lace collars
and gossip bought a former coachman’s cottage on forty acres of land in Twickenham on
the River Thames – and set about building himself a villa which gravely complicated the
prevailing sense of what a beautiful house might look like.
Any number of architects could have furnished Horace Walpole, the youngest son of the
British prime minister, Sir Robert, with something conventional for his new estate, a
Palladian mansion, perhaps a little like his father’s home, Houghton Hall, on the north
Norfolk coast. But in architecture, as in dress, conversation and choice of career, Walpole
prided himself on being diϱerent. In spite of his Classical education, his real interest lay in
the medieval period, which thrilled him with its iconography of ruined abbeys, moonlit
nights, graveyards and (especially) crusaders in armour. Walpole therefore decided to build
himself the world’s first Gothic house.
Because no one before him had ever attempted to apply the ecclesiastical idiom of the
Middle Ages to a domestic setting, Walpole had to be resourceful. He modelled his ϧreplace
on the tomb of Archbishop Bouchier in Canterbury Cathedral, copied the design of his
library shelves from the tomb of Aymer de Valence in Westminster Abbey, and derived the
ceiling of his main hall from the quatrefoil compartments and rosettes of the Abbey’s
Chapel of Henry VII.
-- 16 of 41 --
Few ever saw so much as a picture of how houses looked in other parts of the world:
Smallhythe Place, Tenterden, Kent, early sixteenth century
-- 17 of 41 --
A new understanding of domestic beauty:
Horace Walpole, Strawberry Hill, Twickenham, 1750–92
When he was done, being temperamentally disinclined to keep any of his achievements
quiet, Walpole invited for a tour everyone he knew, which included most of the opinion-
formers and gentry of the land. For good measure, he issued tickets to the general public as
well.
-- 18 of 41 --
The Long Gallery, Strawberry Hill
After a viewing, many of Walpole’s astonished guests began to wonder if they, too, might
not dare to abandon the Classical mode in favour of the Gothic. The fashion started
modestly enough, with the construction of the occasional seaside or suburban villa, but,
within a few decades, a revolution in taste was under way which would shake to the core
the assumptions on which the Classical consensus had formerly rested. Gothic buildings
began to appear in Britain, then across Europe and North America. Transcending its origins
as the fancy of a dilettante, the style acquired architectural seriousness and prestige, to the
extent that, just ϧfty or so years after Walpole broke ground at Strawberry Hill, defenders
of Gothic could claim – much in the way that the Classicists had done before them – that
theirs was the most noble and appropriate architecture of all, the natural choice for both
domestic buildings and the parliaments and universities of the great nations.
-- 19 of 41 --
The most noble and appropriate architecture of all:
Imre Steindl, Houses of Parliament, Budapest, 1904
5.
The factors which fostered the Gothic revival – greater historical awareness, improved
transport links, a new clientele impatient for variety – soon enough generated curiosity
about the architectural styles of other eras and lands. By the early nineteenth century, in
most Western countries, anyone contemplating putting up a house was faced with an
unprecedented array of choices regarding its appearance.
Architects boasted of their ability to turn out houses in Indian, Chinese, Egyptian,
Islamic, Tyrolean or Jacobean styles, or in any combination of these. Among the most
versatile of the new polymaths was an Englishman named Humphry Repton, who earned a
reputation for presenting hesitant clients with detailed drawings of the many stylistic
options available to them.
For those of more modest means, new pattern books were created, the most popular of
which, John Loudon’s The Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm and Villa Architecture (1833),
presented self-builders with plans enabling them to construct houses from any part of the
world, an initiative which rapidly wiped out regional types of architecture.
-- 20 of 41 --
GRECIAN
-- 21 of 41 --
Options for your next home:
Humphry Repton, Characters of Houses, 1816
Left to right: Swiss style cottage and Old English style cottage From John Loudon, The Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm and Villa
Architecture, 1833
Changes in the way property was developed served to promote further opportunities for
eclecticism. In the eighteenth century, London, like most cities in Europe, had expanded
primarily through the eϱorts of aristocratic landowners, who gave their names to the
squares which they carved across their old farms and ϧelds: Lord Southampton, the Earl of
Bedford, Sir Richard Grosvenor and the Duke of Portland. These were men of shared taste:
comfortable in Latin and Greek, students of Cicero and Tacitus, and unambivalent
-- 22 of 41 --
proponents of the Classical style. When the Earl of Bedford issued contracts for the building
of his eponymous square in 1776, his stipulations revealed an almost maniacal obsession
with Classical harmony, setting down as they did rules to govern the exact height of each
storey, the depth of every window frame, the colour of the bricks and the speciϧc kind of
wood to be used in the ϩoorboards (‘the best Memel or Riga timber without a trace of sap’).
So concerned was the earl with Classical proportion and precision that he regularly rose at
dawn and went out with a pair of garden scissors to ensure that the bushes at the centre of
his square were trained to grow symmetrically.
But in the century that followed, royals and aristocrats withdrew from speculative
construction even as demand for housing exploded. Those who came in their wake were not
typically readers of Cicero and Tacitus. More often, they were entrepreneurs with a
penchant for variety and whimsy. Instinctively scornful of the martial sobriety of the
Classical tradition, they competed to attract clients through the playfulness and exuberance
of their developments, as epitomised by a street in Plymouth which combined, within only
a few hundred metres, a row of Roman Corinthian terraced houses, a Doric town hall, an
Oriental chapel, a pair of private homes in the Ionic style and an Egyptian library.
A vanishing Classical consensus about beauty:
Bedford Square, London, 1783
-- 23 of 41 --
New visions of beauty:
John Foulston, Kerr Street, Devonport, Plymouth, 1824
Front elevation, Castle Ward, Strangford Lough, 1767
6.
The only problem with unrestricted choice, however, is that it tends not to lie so far from
outright chaos.
The danger inherent in such freedom ϧrst and famously broke through on the shores of a
quiet lough in Northern Ireland, where, around the middle of the eighteenth century, a
local aristocrat and his wife decided to build themselves a house. Both passionate about
architecture, Viscount Bangor and Lady Anne Bligh nevertheless found that they couldn’t
agree on an appropriate style. The viscount was a Classicist. He wanted something with
three bays, engaged columns, Palladian proportions and windows topped with triangular
consoled pediments. Anne, in contrast, was keener on the Gothic, preferring castellated
-- 24 of 41 --
roofs with pinnacles, centre-pointed windows and quatrefoils. She had heard about the
ceilings at Strawberry Hill and longed to have a few of her own. The struggle grew
stubborn and ill-natured, until the couple’s architect came up with a solution of Solomonic
ingenuity: he would divide the house in two. The front half was built in the Classical style,
the rear in the Gothic. The compromise continued inside, with the music room and stairwell
being Classical in feeling, embellished with Doric friezes and columns, while the boudoir
and private rooms had a Gothic air, complete with fan-vaulted ceilings and pointed-arched
fireplaces.
Rear elevation, Castle Ward
The more sensitive critics were appalled and, with such buildings in mind, began an
ardent search for a way to restore a measure of visual consensus. ‘We suϱer from a carnival
of architecture,’ complained Augustus Pugin in 1836. ‘Private judgement runs riot. Every
architect has a theory of his own.’ In 1828 a young German practitioner named Heinrich
Hübsch published a book whose title characterised the dilemma of an entire age: In What
Style Shall We Build? There had to be a way for the defenders of the Gothic, Old English and
Swiss styles to resolve their disputes; there had to be a way of knowing whether to furnish
the dining room with Ancient Egyptian or Chinese chairs; a way of giving the upper hand
to either Lady Anne or Viscount Bangor – and thus of ensuring that houses would never
again be built facing in two different directions.
But where could such a principle be found? Just what style were architects to build in?
7.
The answer that eventually emerged was not really an answer; rather, it was an
admonishment that it might be irrelevant and even indulgent to raise the question in the
first place.
A prohibition against discussions of beauty in architecture was imposed by a new breed
of men, engineers, who had achieved professional recognition only in the late eighteenth
century, but had thereafter risen quickly to dominance in the construction of the new
-- 25 of 41 --
buildings of the Industrial Revolution. Mastering the technologies of iron and steel, of plate
glass and concrete, they drew interest and inspired awe with their bridges, railway
hangars, aqueducts and docks. More novel even than their abilities, perhaps, was the fact
that they seemed to complete these projects without ever directly asking themselves what
style it was best to adopt. Charged with erecting a bridge, they tried to design the lightest
possible frame that could stretch over the widest span at the lowest cost. When they built a
railway station, they aimed for a hall that would allow steam to disperse safely, let in a
large amount of natural light and accommodate a constant crowd of travellers. They
demanded that factories be able to house unwieldy machinery and that steamships carry
cargoes of impatient passengers punctually across heavy seas. But they did not appear to
give much thought to whether there should be a Corinthian or a Doric set of capitals
gracing the upper galleries of a ship, whether a Chinese dragon might look pleasing at the
end of a locomotive or whether suburban gas works should be done up in a Tuscan or
Islamic style.
Yet, despite this indiϱerence, the new men of science seemed capable of building the
most impressive and, in many cases, the most seductive structures of their confused age.
8.
The philosophy of the engineers ϩew in the face of everything the architectural profession
had ever stood for. ‘To turn something useful, practical, functional into something
beautiful, that is architecture’s duty,’ insisted Karl Friedrich Schinkel. ‘Architecture, as
distinguished from mere building, is the decoration of construction,’ echoed Sir George
Gilbert Scott. If the Doge’s Palace deserved to be classiϧed as great architecture, it was not
because the roof was watertight or because it provided Venice’s civil servants with the
necessary number of meeting rooms but rather, the architects defensively suggested,
because it sported carvings on its roof, a delicate arrangement of white and pink bricks on
its façades, and deliberately slender, tapering, pointed arches throughout – details that
would have had no place in a design by a graduate of the École Polytechnique in Paris or
the Engineering Academy of Dresden. The essence of great architecture was understood to
reside in what was functionally unnecessary.
-- 26 of 41 --
The irrelevance of aesthetic discussion:
John Fowler, Benjamin Baker, Forth Railway Bridge, construction of the central girder, September 1889
‘To turn something useful, practical, functional into something beautiful, that is architecture’s duty’:
Doge’s Palace (detail), Venice, 1340–1420
9.
The principles of engineering may have brutally contradicted those of architecture, but a
vocal minority of nineteenth-century architects nevertheless perceived that the engineers
were capable of providing them with a critical key to their salvation – for what these men
had, and they so sorely lacked, was certainty. The engineers had landed on an apparently
impregnable method of evaluating the wisdom of a design: they felt conϧdently able to
declare that a structure was correct and honest in so far as it performed its mechanical
functions eϫciently; and false and immoral in so far as it was burdened with non-
supporting pillars, decorative statues, frescos or carvings.
Exchanging discussions of beauty for considerations of function promised to move
architecture away from a morass of perplexing, insoluble disputes about aesthetics towards
an uncontentious pursuit of technological truth, ensuring that it might henceforth be as
peculiar to argue about the appearance of a building as it would be to argue about the
-- 27 of 41 --
answer to a simple algebraic equation.
With functional principles standing as a new measure of worth, the entire history of
architecture could be scanned and its masterworks reassessed in terms of their relative
degrees of veracity and falsehood. The Romans were deemed dishonest for having added
columns to the Colosseum, because these elegantly sculpted, costly pieces of stone only
pretended to support the upper storeys, whereas in fact – as any engineer could see – the
whole structure was being held up by the arches alone.
Equally, Johann Balthasar Neumann had lied in almost every aspect of his
Vierzehnheiligen Pilgrimage Church in Banz. Here the inside walls made a show of holding
up the building, but in reality that task fell to a separate and hidden frame. Even
Neumann’s domed, painted ceiling had nothing to do with the real roof but was merely a
stucco skin nestled beneath the actual, conventionally pitched design.
A mendacious ceiling:
Johann Balthasar Neumann, Vierzehnheiligen Pilgrimage Church, Banz, 1772
Charles Cockerell, Ashmolean and Taylorian Institute, Oxford, 1840
Similarly, Charles Cockerell was judged to have been almost disgracefully deceptive and
wasteful in his design for the Ashmolean Museum and Taylorian Institute in Oxford. His
crime had been to place massive Ionic columns, which could have supported four storeys’
worth of masonry, around the outside of the building, where they carried nothing heavier
-- 28 of 41 --
than pots and statues, while leaving the real weight of the structure to be borne by another
set of columns concealed within the walls.
10.
But what would a house look like whose architect had renounced any interest in beauty in
order to focus exclusively on mechanical functioning? To believe its creator in certain of his
moods, it might resemble the Villa Savoye.
In the spring of 1928 a Parisian couple named Pierre and Emilie Savoye approached the
41-year-old Swiss architect Le Corbusier and asked him to design a country house for them
and their young son Roger on a wooded plot of land they owned overlooking the Seine, in
Poissy, west of Paris. Le Corbusier had by this point in his career built ϧfteen private
houses and acquired international renown for his categorical views on architecture.
‘Our engineers are healthy and virile, active and useful, balanced and happy in their
work,’ he exclaimed in Towards a New Architecture (1923), while ‘our architects are
disillusioned and unemployed, boastful or peevish. This is because there will soon be
nothing more for them to do. We no longer have the money to erect historical souvenirs. At
the same time, everyone needs to wash! Our engineers provide for these things and so they
will be our builders.’
Le Corbusier recommended that the houses of the future be ascetic and clean, disciplined
and frugal. His hatred of any kind of decoration extended to a pity for the British Royal
Family and the ornate, golden carriage in which they travelled to open Parliament every
year. He suggested that they push the carved monstrosity oϱ the cliϱs of Dover and instead
learn to travel around their realm in a Hispano-Suiza 1911 racing car. He even mocked
Rome, the traditional destination for the education and ediϧcation of young architects, and
renamed it the ‘city of horrors’, ‘the damnation of the half-educated’ and ‘the cancer of
French architecture’ – on account of its violation of functional principles through an
abundance of Baroque detailing, wall-painting and statuary.
-- 29 of 41 --
From Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture, 1923
For Le Corbusier, true, great architecture – meaning, architecture motivated by the quest
for efficiency – was more likely to be found in a 40,000-kilowatt electricity turbine or a low-
pressure ventilating fan. It was to these machines that his books accorded the reverential
photographs which previous architectural writers had reserved for cathedrals and opera
houses.
Once asked by a magazine editor to name his favourite chair, Le Corbusier cited the seat
of a cockpit, and described the ϧrst time he ever saw an aeroplane, in the spring of 1909,
in the sky above Paris – it was the aviator the Comte de Lambert taking a turn around the
Eiϱel Tower – as the most signiϧcant moment of his life. He observed that the requirements
of ϩight of necessity rid aeroplanes of all superϩuous decoration and so unwittingly
transformed them into successful pieces of architecture. To place a Classical statue atop a
house was as absurd as to add one to a plane, he noted, but at least by crashing in response
to this addition, the plane had the advantage of rendering its absurdity starkly manifest.
‘L’avion accuse,’ he concluded.
From Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow and Its Planning, 1925
From Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture, 1923
But if the function of a plane was to ϩy, what was the function of a house? Le Corbusier
-- 30 of 41 --
arrived (‘scientiϧcally’ he assured his readers) at a simple list of requirements, beyond
which all other ambitions were no more than ‘romantic cobwebs’. The function of a house
was, he wrote, to provide: ‘1. A shelter against heat, cold, rain, thieves and the inquisitive.
2. A receptacle for light and sun. 3. A certain number of cells appropriated to cooking,
work, and personal life.’
11.
Behind a wall on the summit of a hill in Poissy, a gravel path curves through dense trees
before opening out into a clearing, in the middle of which stands a thin, white, rectangular
box, with ribbon windows running along its sides, supported oϱ the ground on a series of
implausibly slender pillars. A structure on the roof of the Villa Savoye resembles a water
tower or gas cylinder, but turns out on closer inspection to be a terrace with a semicircular
protecting wall. The house looks like a piece of ϧnely tooled precision machinery, some
industrial object of unknown purpose, with ϩawless white surfaces that on a bright day
reϩect back the sun with the luminescent intensity of ϧshermen’s cottages on the islands of
the Aegean. It seems that the house may be no more than a temporary visitor and that its
roof-top equipment could at any point receive a signal that would lead it to ϧre its
concealed engines and rise slowly over the surrounding trees and historically styled villas
on the beginning of a long journey home to a remote galaxy.
The inϩuence of science and aeronautics continues inside. A front door made of steel
opens onto a hallway as clean, bright and bare as an operating theatre. There are tiles on
the ϩoor, naked bulbs on the ceiling and, in the middle of the hall, a basin which invites
guests to cleanse themselves of the impurities of the outside world. Dominating the room is
a large ramp with a simple tubular rail which leads up to the main living quarters. Here a
large kitchen is equipped with all the conveniences of its era. Steel-framed strip windows
feed natural light into the principal rooms. The bathrooms are shrines to hygiene and
athleticism; the exposed pipe work would do justice to a submarine.
Even in these intimate spaces, the mood remains technical and astringent. There is
nothing extraneous or decorative here, no rosettes or mouldings, no ϩourishes or
ornaments. Walls meet ceilings at perfect right angles, without the softening inϩuence of
borders. The visual language is drawn exclusively from industry, the artificial light provided
by factory lamps. There are few pieces of furniture, for Le Corbusier had recommended to
his clients that they keep their belongings to a minimum, reacting with injured alarm when
Madame Savoye expressed a desire to ϧt an armchair and two sofas in the living room.
‘Home life today is being paralysed by the deplorable notion that we must have furniture,’
her architect protested. ‘This notion should be rooted out and replaced by that of
equipment.’
-- 31 of 41 --
Le Corbusier, living room, Villa Savoye, Poissy, 1931
‘What [modern man] wants is a monk’s cell, well lit and heated, with a corner from
which he can look at the stars,’ Le Corbusier had written. As the builders ϧnished their
work, the Savoye family had reason to feel conϧdent that in the house he had designed for
them, these aspirations, at least, would be consummately met.
Le Corbusier, Villa Savoye, Poissy, 1931
12.
Governed by an ethos conceived by engineers, Modernism claimed to have supplied a
deϧnitive answer to the question of beauty in architecture: the point of a house was not to
be beautiful but to function well.
Yet this neat separation between the vexed matter of appearance and the more
straightforward one of performance has always hung on an illusory distinction. Although
-- 32 of 41 --
we may at ϧrst glance associate the word ‘function’ with the eϫcient provision of physical
sanctuary, we are in the end unlikely to respect a structure which does no more than keep
us dry and warm.
Of almost any building, we ask not only that it do a certain thing but also that it look a
certain way, that it contribute to a given mood: of religiosity or scholarship, rusticity or
modernity, commerce or domesticity. We may require it to generate a feeling of reassurance
or of excitement, of harmony or of containment. We may hope that it will connect us to the
past or stand as a symbol of the future, and we would complain, no less than we would
about a malfunctioning bathroom, if this second, aesthetic, expressive level of function
were left unattended.
In a more encompassing suggestion, John Ruskin proposed that we seek two things of
our buildings. We want them to shelter us. And we want them to speak to us – to speak to
us of whatever we find important and need to be reminded of.
13.
In reality, the architects of the Modernist movement, just like all their predecessors, wanted
their houses to speak. Only not of the nineteenth century. Or of privilege and aristocratic
life. Or of the Middle Ages or Ancient Rome. They wanted their houses to speak of the
future, with its promise of speed and technology, democracy and science. They wanted
their armchairs to evoke racing cars and planes, they wanted their lamps to evoke the
power of industry and their coffee pots the dynamism of high-speed trains.
It wasn’t that they ever lost sight of the importance of arousing feelings; their argument
was, instead, with the family of feelings that previous architectural styles had generated.
With his central staircase in the Villa Savoye, Le Corbusier – just like Ange-Jacques
Gabriel at the Classical pavilion of Le Petit Trianon in Versailles, a few miles to the south –
was trying to do something other than simply carry people to an upper floor. He was trying
to prompt a state of the soul.
Despite their claims to a purely scientiϧc and reasoned approach, the relationship of
Modernist architects to their work remained at base a romantic one: they looked to
architecture to support a way of life that appealed to them. Their domestic buildings were
conceived as stage sets for actors in an idealised drama about contemporary existence.
Two staircases to prompt two different states of the soul:
-- 33 of 41 --
Two staircases to prompt two different states of the soul:
Left: Le Petit Trianon, Versailles, 1768
Right: Villa Savoye, Poissy, 1931
A stage set for actors in an idealised drama about contemporary existence:
Advertisement for the 1927 Mercedes-Benz, set against Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret’s Double-house, Weissenhofsiedlung,
Stuttgart, 1927
14.
So strong was the aesthetic interest of the Modernists that it routinely took precedence over
considerations of eϫciency. The Villa Savoye might have looked like a practically minded
machine, but it was in reality an artistically motivated folly. The bare walls were
handmade by artisans using costly imported Swiss mortar, they were as delicate as pieces of
lace and as devoted to generating feelings as the jewel-encrusted naves of a Counter-
Reformation Church.
By Modernism’s own standards, the roof of the villa was equally, and yet more ruinously,
dishonest. In spite of initial protests from the Savoyes, Le Corbusier insisted – supposedly
on technical and economic grounds alone – that a ϩat roof would be preferable to a pitched
one. It would, he assured his clients, be cheaper to construct, easier to maintain and cooler
-- 34 of 41 --
in summer, and Madame Savoye would be able to do her gymnastic exercises on it without
being bothered by damp vapours emanating from the ground ϩoor. But only a week after
the family moved in, the roof sprang a leak over Roger’s bedroom, letting in so much water
that the boy contracted a chest infection, which turned into pneumonia, which eventually
required him to spend a year recuperating in a sanatorium in Chamonix. In September
1936, six years after the villa’s oϫcial completion, Madame Savoye compressed her feelings
about the performance of the flat roof into a (rain-splattered) letter: ‘It’s raining in the hall,
it’s raining on the ramp, and the wall of the garage is absolutely soaked. What’s more, it’s
still raining in my bathroom, which ϩoods in bad weather, as the water comes in through
the skylight.’ Le Corbusier promised that the problem would be ϧxed straightaway, then
took the opportunity to remind his client of how enthusiastically his ϩat-roofed design had
been received by architectural critics worldwide: ‘You should place a book on the table in
the downstairs hall and ask all your visitors to inscribe their names and addresses in it.
You’ll see how many ϧne autographs you will collect’. But this invitation to philography
was of little comfort to the rheumatic Savoye family. ‘After innumerable demands on my
part, you have ϧnally accepted that this house which you built in 1929 is uninhabitable,’
admonished Madame Savoye in the autumn of 1937. ‘Your responsibility is at stake and I
have no need to foot the bill. Please render it habitable immediately. I sincerely hope that I
will not have to take recourse to legal action.’ Only the outbreak of the Second World War
and the Savoye family’s consequent ϩight from Paris saved Le Corbusier from having to
answer in a courtroom for the design of his largely uninhabitable, if extraordinarily
beautiful, machine-for-living.
Beautiful but not rain-proof:
Rooftop, Villa Savoye, 1931
15.
If Modernist architects privately designed with beauty in mind, why did they justify their
work principally in technological terms?
Fear seems to have lain at the heart of their discretion. The end of a belief in a universal
-- 35 of 41 --
standard of beauty had created a climate in which no one style could be immune from
criticism. Objections to the appearance of Modernist houses, voiced by adherents of Gothic
or Tyrolean architecture, could not be shrugged oϱ without inviting accusations of high-
handedness and arrogance. In aesthetics, as in democratic politics, a ϧnal arbiter had
grown elusive.
Hence the attractions of a scientiϧc language with which to ward oϱ detractors and
convince the wavering. Even the God of the Old Testament, faced with the continual
querulousness of the tribes of Israel, had occasionally to ignite a piece of desert shrub to
awe his audience into reverence. Technology would be the Modernists’ burning bush. To
speak of technology in relation to one’s houses was to appeal – now that the inϩuence of
Christianity was waning and Classical culture was being ignored – to the most prestigious
force in society, responsible for penicillin, telephones and aeroplanes. Science, then, would
apparently determine the pitch of the roof.
16.
Yet, in truth, science is rarely so categorical. In 1925 the architect and designer Marcel
Breuer unveiled a chair which he touted as the world’s ϧrst soberly logical solution to ‘the
problem of sitting’. Every part of the B3 chair was the result, he explained, of an intensive
effort to banish ‘the whimsical in favour of the rational’.
The B3’s seat and back were made of leather for durability; its oϱset angular shape was
the inevitable answer to the needs of the human vertebrae; and its steel frame, because it
was a hundred times stronger than wood, would never splinter or chip.
But Breuer’s attempt to make a scientiϧc case for his chair could not breach an
impregnable reality: while it may be necessary to resort to speciϧc materials and forms
when constructing a bridge, there is no corresponding technical need to limit one’s
imagination in designing a piece of living-room furniture, which must merely support the
weight of a human body – and so can be built of curved steel but also as happily of oak,
bamboo, plastic or ϧbreglass. A chair can equally well satisfy its modest brief in the guise of
a B3, a Queen Anne or a Windsor armchair. Science alone cannot tell us how our seats
should look.
Even in more complex commissions, the laws of engineering seldom dictate a particular
style. The Montjuïc Telecommunications Tower in Barcelona, for example, could have taken
on any number of forms while still managing to transmit its signals adequately. The
antenna could have been sculpted to look like a pear rather than like a javelin; the base
might have been made to resemble a riding boot rather than the prow of a spacecraft.
Dozens of options would have each worked well mechanically. But as its architect, Santiago
Calatrava, recognised, only a very few designs would have conveyed with appropriate
poetry the promises of modernity to the people of Barcelona.
17.
The incoherencies of the Modernist relationship to science return us to the confusing
plethora of architectural options that the early Modernists had once hoped to eradicate. We
return to the carnival of architecture. Why not carve ϩowers on our buildings? Why not use
-- 36 of 41 --
concrete panels imprinted with pictures of aeroplanes and insects? Why not coat a
skyscraper with Islamic motifs?
If engineering cannot tell us what our houses should look like, nor in a pluralistic and
non-deferential world can precedent or tradition, we must be free to pursue all stylistic
options. We should acknowledge that the question of what is beautiful is both impossible to
elucidate and shameful and even undemocratic to mention.
A chair dictated by science?
Marcel Breuer, B3 chair, 1925
Functional chairs:
Left: Queen Anne japanned armchair, c. 1710
-- 37 of 41 --
Right: High-back Windsor armchair, 1850s
Art rather than science:
Santiago Calatrava, Montjuïc Telecommunications Tower, Barcelona, 1991
18.
However, there might be a way to surmount this state of sterile relativism with the help of
John Ruskin’s provocative remark about the eloquence of architecture. The remark focuses
our minds on the idea that buildings are not simply visual objects without any connection
to concepts which we can analyse and then evaluate. Buildings speak – and on topics which
can readily be discerned. They speak of democracy or aristocracy, openness or arrogance,
welcome or threat, a sympathy for the future or a hankering for the past.
-- 38 of 41 --
The return of choice:
Left: Herzog & de Meuron, Library of the Eberswalde Technical School, Eberswalde, 1999
Right: Jean Nouvel, proposed skyscraper, Doha, 2004
Left: Tias Eckhoff, Regent Service, Porsgrund, 1961
Right: Blue Cameo Service, Sèvres, 1778
Any object of design will give oϱ an impression of the psychological and moral attitudes
it supports. We can, for example, feel two distinct conceptions of fulfilment emanating from
a plain Scandinavian crockery set on the one hand and an ornate Sèvres one on the other –
an invitation to a democratic graceful sensibility in the former case, to a ceremonial and
class-bound disposition in the latter.
In essence, what works of design and architecture talk to us about is the kind of life that
would most appropriately unfold within and around them. They tell us of certain moods
that they seek to encourage and sustain in their inhabitants. While keeping us warm and
helping us in mechanical ways, they simultaneously hold out an invitation for us to be
specific sorts of people. They speak of visions of happiness.
To describe a building as beautiful therefore suggests more than a mere aesthetic
fondness; it implies an attraction to the particular way of life this structure is promoting
through its roof, door handles, window frames, staircase and furnishings. A feeling of
beauty is a sign that we have come upon a material articulation of certain of our ideas of a
good life.
Similarly, buildings will strike us as oϱensive not because they violate a private and
-- 39 of 41 --
mysterious visual preference but because they conϩict with our understanding of the
rightful sense of existence – which helps to explain the seriousness and viciousness with
which disputes about fitting architecture tend to unfold.
19.
The advantage of shifting the focus of discussion away from the strictly visual towards the
values promoted by buildings is that we become able to handle talk about the appearance
of works of architecture rather as we do wider debates about people, ideas and political
agendas.
Arguments about what is beautiful emerge as no easier to resolve, but then again no
harder, than disputes about what is wise or right. We can learn to defend or attack a
concept of beauty in the same way we might defend or attack a legal position or an ethical
stance. We can understand, and publically explain, why we believe a building to be
desirable or offensive on the basis of the things it talks to us about.
The notion of buildings that speak helps us to place at the very centre of our
architectural conundrums the question of the values we want to live by – rather than
merely of how we want things to look.
-- 40 of 41 --
What do we want our buildings to talk to us about?:
Left: Michael Shanly Homes, Oakington Place, Middlesex, 2005
Right: Office of Makoto Yamaguchi, Villa, Karuizawa, 2003
-- 41 of 41 --