SEVENTEEN
The Acoustic Designer
When the rhythms of the soundscape become confused or erratic, society
sinks to a slovenly and imperiled condition. That was the thesis announced
in the introduction to this book. But the other thesis under which I have
written is that the soundscape is no accidental byproduct of society; rather
it is a deliberate construction by its creators, a composition which may be
as much distinguished for its beauty as for its ugliness. When a society
fumbles with sound, when it does not comprehend the principles of deco-
rum and balance in soundmaking, when it does not understand that there
is a time to produce and a time to shut up, the soundscape slips from hi-fi
to 10-6 condition and ultimately consumes itself in cacophony.
It is important to realize that the 10-6 state is not a natural corollary
to higher density living or population increase. A visit to the bazaars and
traditional towns of the Middle East will impress one by the quiet, almost
furtive manner in which large numbers of people manage to go about their
business without disturbing one another. The sound sewer is much more
likely to result when a society trades its ears for its eyes, and it is certain
to result when this is accompanied by an impassioned devotion to ma-
chines.
If the acoustic designer favors the ear, it is only as an antidote to the
visual stress of modem times and in anticipation of the ultimate reintegra-
tion of all the senses.
The Principles of Acoustic Desi~ The acoustic designer
may incline society to listen again to modeTs of beautifully modulated and
balanced soundscapes such as we have in great musical compositions. From
237
-- 1 of 9 --
238 THE SOUNDSCAPE
these, clues may be obtained as to how the soundscape may be altered,
sped up, slowed down, thinned or thickened, weighted in favor of or
against specific effects. The ultimate endeavor is to learn how sounds may
be rearranged so that all possible types may be heard to advantage-an art
called orchestration. The outright prohibition of sound being impossible,
and all exercises in noise abatement being consequently futile, these nega-
tive activities must now be turned to positive advantage following the
indications of the new art and science of acoustic design.
Acoustic design does not, therefore, consist of a set of paradigms or
formulae to be imposed on lawless or recalcitrant soundscapes, but is
rather a set of principles to be employed in adjudicating and improving
them. In addition to the lessons taught by music, these principles consist
of:
1. a respect for the ear and voice-when the ear suffers a threshold shift
or the voice cannot be heard, the environment is harmful;
2. an awareness of sound symbolism-which is always more than func-
tional signaling;
3. a knowledge of the rhythms and tempi of the natural soundscape;
4. an understanding of the balancing mechanisms by which an eccentric
soundscape may be turned back on itself
This last point is most easily understood by turning to Chinese philosophy
and art. It is the natural alteration of events that forms the secret of the
yin and yang exchange, the perfect oscillation in which each part implies
the existence of the other. Lao-tzu says: "Gravity is the root of lightness;
stillness, the ruler of movement." A Chinese painter puts it this way:
Where things grow and expand that is k 'ai; where things are gathered
up, that is ho. When you expand (k'ai) you should think of gathering
up (ho) and then there will be structure; when you gather up (ho) you
should think of expanding (k'ai) and then you will have inexpressible
effortlessness and an air of inexhaustible spirit.
In ancient Chinese society balance and regulation were highly prized in all
things. Excesses of any kind were to be avoided. In the music of this period,
p'ing, or level unmodulating pitch, with its attributes of smoothness and
repose, was contrasted with tSt, sudden or contrary movement, with its
attributes of assertiveness, activity and aggression. Analyses of pieces of
music of the period show that balance was strictly maintained between the
two states, so that a composition contained an identical number of p'ing
and tsi features. By contrast, Western music is unbalanced; it is always
inclined to be more static or more active. And the soundscape of the West
also runs to extremes. There are numerous states of imbalance in need of
attention. In each case the term in the left-hand column appears to be
dominating that in the right-hand column.
-- 2 of 9 --
The Acoustic Designer 239
Sound/Not-sound
Technological sounds/Human sounds
Artificial sounds/Natural sounds
Continuous sounds/Discrete sounds
Low-frequency sounds/Mid- or high-frequency sounds
Thought ~ust now be given to how the weighting of these terms may
be readjusted to create new harmony and equipoise. These are enormous
issues beyond the abilities of any individual to appreciably alter. But the
designer does not redesign a whole society: he merely shows society what
it is missing by not redesigning itself. And if he does this with passion and
talent, his recommendations will eventually be heard and understood.
Society is always incapable of imagining improvements without the voice
from beyond. Ask Mr. Smith or Mr. Jones what kind of house they want
to live in and they'll have you design a hovel every time. It devolves on
the designer to point out alternatives.
This is the function of art: to open out new modes of perception and
to portray alternative life styles. Art is always outside society and the artist
must never expect to win popularity easily. The mind of the designer will
move in huge unrealistic excursions too; but he may also engage in some
very practical preservation and repair work.
The Preservation of Soundmarks One practical task of the
acoustic designer would be to draw attention to soundmarks of distinction
and, if there is good reason to do so, to fight for their preservation. The
unique soundmark deserves to make history as surely as a Beethoven
symphony. Its memory cannot be erased by months or years. Some sound-
marks are monolithic, inscribing their signatures over the whole commu-
nity. Such are famous church or clock bells, horns or whistles. What would
Salzburg be without its Salvatore Mundi, Stockholm without its Stadhuset
carillon, London without Big Ben?
In Vancouver, for instance, we have a cannon, built in 1816, which
since 1894 has been fired over the harbor each evening, originally to tell
fishermen the time, now preserved as a sound souvenir. We also had a
diaphone foghorn at the Point Atkinson lighthouse which dated from 1912
and was recently replaced by the Ministry of Transport in its automation
scrabble. A more recent arrival (1972) is a set of air horns on top of one
of the city's higher buildings which barks out t~e opening phrase of the
National Anthem each day at noon (108 dBA a block away).
Whatever one may think of such soundmarks, they reflect a commu-
nity character. Every community will have its own soundmarks, even
though they may not always be beautiful. For instance: /lOuring the very
early period of gold mining [in Ballaarat, Australia] the very many quartz
batteries operating caused a constant and sustained noise throughout the
whole City area. This was accepted as part of the process of gold extrac-
tion."
-- 3 of 9 --
240 THE SOUNDSCAPE
Some unusual sounds receive legal protection. Thus in the hot city of
Damascus the sound of ice-making equipment is specifically exempted
from the list of proscripted sounds mentioned in the noise abatement
by-law, because such equipment performs a desirable community service
and therefore presumably has an attractive symbolism.
It is the less ostentatious soundmarks that need the special vigilance
of the acoustic designer, for despite their originality or antique charm, they
are more likely to be unceremoniously excised from the soundscape. Often
it will take the visitor to point out the value or originality of a soundmark
to a community; for local inhabitants it may be an inconspicuous keynote.
Let me mention a few originals from my own memory.
• the scraping of the heavy metal chairs on the tile floors of Parisian
coffee-houses;
• the brilliant slam of the doors of the old carriages of the Paris Metro,
followed by a sharp click, as the latch falls to the locked position
(the effect can now, 1976, be heard only on the Marie d'lssy-Port
de la Chapelle line);
• the sound of the leather straps on the trams in Melbourne, Australia
-when they are tugged they twist around the long horizontal sup-
port poles and make rich squeaking noises;
• the virtuoso drumming of the Austrian bureaucrats with their long-
handled rubber stamps: ta-te-te-daa-ta-te-daa;
• the high-pitched brilliant bells of the horse-drawn taxis in Konya,
the last to be heard in any major town in Turkey;
• or in London, the memorable voice on the recording at certain sub-
urban tube stations that says (or used to say), "Stand clear of the
doors!"
The world is full of uncounterfeiting and uncounterfeitable sound souve-
nirs such as these, indelible memories for the aurally sensitive tourist, and
always in need of protection against replacement by duds from multi-
national factories.
Repairs to the Soundscape Once acoustic design is established
as a useful profession, and young designers move out into positions in
government and industry, they will be able to effect numerous practical
repairs to the soundscape. They might start by correcting some of the
bungled design work of their tone-deaf predecessors.
Consider, for instance, a sonic signal for traffic crosswalks. There are
several of these already in existence in different parts of the world. I have
heard at least three: in Auckland (New Zealand), Vaxjo (Sweden) and
London (England). In Auckland, the traffic lights have three modes: one for
vehicular traffic in each direction and one for pedestrians, allowing them
the freedom of the intersection. The cue for the pedestrians is a special
light plus sonic signal, a hideous buzz, yet neither loud enough nor of
-- 4 of 9 --
The Acoustic Designer 241
sufficiently high frequency to clear the traffic noise. The signals in both
London and Vaxjo consist of rhythmic effects. In London a series of rapid
pips, a semitone apart, sound for about four seconds to signal the pedes-
trian to cross. In the signal I listened to, the two sounds always got out of
phase, the one lagging slightly behind the other, in a manner that defied
one to decide whether it was a stroke of British design genius or technical
ineptitude. In Vaxjo a single ticking noise has two modes: a fast to go and
a slow to stop. The first sounds like a ratchet and the second is set at about
the heartbeat tempo of an Olympic sprinter, which is, I suppose, the image
intended to be evoked.
The point I am trying to make is that while the acoustic crosswalk is
probably a useful idea (one can appreciate its value for the blind), none of
the signals heard so far meet all the design criteria, which are both social
and aesthetic.
North America was introduced to a whole line of obnoxious buzzings
when, about 1970, designers decided to equip cars with safety belts and
installed a noise to remind the passenger to use them. Here again, the
identical question: why must an acoustic attention-getter always be abom-
inable?
Recall the aberrational quality of schizophonic devices such as public
address systems. The sudden impact and startle effect of a voice barking
an announcement down your neck, exaggerated by the instantaneous
switch-on time of electroacoustical devices, is common enough today, but
it needs to be redesigned. The technique of attracting attention without
frightening the public out of its wits calls for subtle creative action. Some-
times a bell or buzzer is used for this purpose but the envelope of the bell
is wrong. The P.A. sound cue should not have a sudden but a sloped attack.
Not~ but~.
The New Zealand Railway employs a tape-loop prelude to P.A. an-
nouncements consisting of an eight-second tune on a glockenspiel. But
eight seconds is probably too long for repetitive use. In Holland, a short
three-tone tune is played on an electric glockenspiel, but this is perhaps
too short and boring. The student of acoustic design could profitably be
given the assignment of designing a few short preludes to improve such
situations.
These examples are only a few of those requiring attention, from a list
long enough to keep an army of intelligent people amply occupied.
The Bad Pun of Bell So Telephone Bell All public announce-
ments abbreviate thought. An intelligent society would keep them to a
minimum. The telephone also abbreviates thought. At any moment-
perhaps even before I complete my next sentence-a voice from California
or London or Vienna may jump onto the table announced by what Law-
rence Durrell in Justine called " a small needle-like ring."
Who invented the telephone bell? Certainly not a musician. Perhaps
-- 5 of 9 --
242 THE SOUNDS CAPE
it is just a bad pun on the name of its inventor? It may be that such an
audacious device should have an obnoxious sound, but the matter should
be accorded more consideration. If we must be distracted ten or twenty
times each day, why not by pleasant sounds? Why could not everyone
choose his or her own telephone signal? In a day when cassettes and tape
loops are cheap to manufacture this is entirely feasible.
It is true that the rings of telephones vary considerably from nation
to nation. North American phones have single rings, caused by a mechan-
ical clapper vibrating between two bells of identical or near-identical fre-
quency. On Vancouver telephones this ring is repeated every 6 seconds
with approximately 1.8 seconds of ring followed by 4.2 seconds of silence.
Although the intensity of the ring on North American telephones can
be regulated to some extent by a dial on the base of the instrument, the
intensity of the voice speaking and the ringback sound (i.e., the ringing
heard over the receiver when a call is placed) are not strictly regulated. In
one of our research projects we have registered a busy signal at over 120
dBA and conversation at over 100 dBA at the point where the ear would
normally make contact with the receiver. This is loud enough to be an aural
health hazard.
A modicum of design consideration was given to the British tele-
phone, for its two loud rings, followed by a pause, was intentionally
constructed to total five units-two beats of rings followed by three beats
of silence-because it was thought that this asymmetrical meter would be
more attention-getting than a meter of three, four or six. New Zealand
telephones are constructed the same way, with two rings, and I timed the
cycle at 3~ seconds, resulting in a considerably more impatient sound than
the North American telephone. (Also, on New Zealand telephones no
manual adjustment of the intensity of the ringing is possible.) By contrast,
in Sweden and parts of Germany the interval between rings is ten seconds.
But in 1975 the Swedes began a conversion program to a faster-paced ring.
For the telephone company time is money. Lines will be less tied up if
telephones are answered more quickly. Thus in order for the telephone
company to save a few crowns a whole nation is going to be made more
jumpy.
One of the more interesting utilizations of music in a public system
was that of the French telephone. When one used to dial 10 (manuel Paris
vers province), one heard the first measures of Gustave Charpentier's opera
Louise while the call was being connected; when one dialed 19 (automaHque
internaHonal), it was the first bars of the "Ode to Joy" from Beethoven's
Ninth Symphony. But on December 4, 1971, the music was replaced by
a steady tone of 850 hertz. One of the strategists explains why: "This
simplification will contribute to the development of the 'tele-infor-
matique' by permitting the 'telecommande' of all calls under computer
control, and besides this will facilitate the installation of punched-key
'numerotation' and the employment of automatic transmitters." Did the
public prefer 850 hertz to Beethoven? "The public has not reacted in any
-- 6 of 9 --
The Acoustic Designer 243
noteworthy manner to the recent change, which had already been an-
nounced to them well in advance on radio, television, and in the press."
The fact was that the music not only slowed down operational efficiency,
but it also slowed down telephone users. "Even before the modification we
realized that people telephoning in other parts of France, where there was
no music, made their calls more quickly than the Parisians, who presum-
ably were lulled by the fine music of Louise or the 'Ode to Joy' of Beetho-
ven and paused to listen to it."
The acoustic designer wants to redress some imbalances. He wants to
slow things down. He wants to reduce the number of flat-line monotones
and to reintroduce strong and exhilarating sounds. You say that he
wouldn't have been able to prevent Paris from converting to a monotone,
but I say that until he injects himself into a position where he can effec-
tively insist on the aesthetic losses of a one-tone telephone we will con-
tinue steering straight toward a social flatland. Who wants to defend
Beethoven or Charpentier? Let us have a hundred, a thousand, a million
sounds, one for each exchange, for each hamlet, for each customer the
world over ...!
Instead we are told to prepare for international standardization. On
the new North American telephones, dialing is speeded up by a punch-
number system. Each number on the dial is made up of two frequencies,
a low and a high so that tunes are possible, and Beethoven (approximately)
returns with the opening of his Fifth as 0005-8883.
Car Horns Car horns are another example of a sonic absolute be-
queathed anonymously to the world by an inventor who took few music
lessons. In North American cars the interval of the two horns is set at a
major or minor third. The only three-note horns in use are on luxury
Cadillacs and Lincoln Continentals, an aristocratic touch which reminds us
of the old days when the fattest princes had the biggest orchestras. The
horn of the Lincoln Continental is tuned to sound an augmented triad (two
superimposed major thirds).
In Turkish cars, horns are tuned to the interval of a major or minor
second. While in some cultures this is considered an exceedingly dissonant
diad, there are examples in the Balkans, for instance from certain regions
of western Bulgaria, of folk singing in which two voices sing together in
major or minor seconds, the singers considering this a consonant interval.
In the interest of preserving idiosyncracies in the world soundscape,
some thought should be given to using the characteristic intervals and
motifs of local musical cultures in tuning environmental signals of all
kinds. In Java, for instance, it might be the unique "shortened" fifth that
could serve for the car hom, for this interval is, I understand, found in no
other culture, though it is basic to the tuning of Gamelan orchestras and
is said to derive from the characteristic call of an island bird.
-- 7 of 9 --
244 THE SOUNDSCAPE
The Utopian Soundscape There are times for practical repair
work and there are times for huge imaginative excursions into utopia. It
does not matter whether such dreams are directly realizable; they give
elevation to the spirit, nobility to the mind.
One such utopian dream was Charles Ives's Universe Symphony. This
was a work with hundreds or thousands of participants, spread out across
the valleys, on hillsides and on mountaintops. It was to be so gigantic, so
inclusive that no single individual could ever assume mastery or control
of it. Anyone who wished to do so could add to it. It was only an idea then,
but one which excites our imagination enormously. To imagine ourselves
as participants in a Universe Symphony is to give more critical attention
to our performance than is the case if we merely consider ourselves to be
in a dumpyard. We analyze and criticize the music better; we recognize the
soloists, the conductors, the prima donnas; we listen to the talents and
faults of each. It is here that the acoustic designer can provide us with
portions of the score to perform, as in fact has already been done in
environmental compositions by numerous young composers.
Music is the key to the utopian soundscape. By comparison, a study
of the sounds in utopian literature is disappointing. On the whole, the
suggestions of the futurists have been tepid. About all we learn is that Sir
Thomas More anticipated and approved of Moozak, or that Edward Bel-
lamy, in Looking Backward, anticipated the radio. The most sustained and
broadly conceived soundscape of the future was that of Francis Bacon's
New Atlantis, where he describes special houses devoted to the study of
sounds.
We have also sound-houses, where we practise and demonstrate all
sounds and their generation. We have harmonies which you have not,
of quarter-sounds and lesser slides of sounds. Divers instruments of
music likewise to you unknown, some sweeter than any you have;
together with bells and rings that are dainty and sweet. We represent
small sounds as great and deep; likewise great sounds, extenuate and
sharp; we make divers tremblings and warblings of sounds, which in
their original are entire. We represent and imitate all articulate sounds
and letters, and the voices and notes of beasts and birds. We have
certain helps, which, set to the ear do further the hearing greatly. We
have also divers strange and artificial echoes, reflecting the voice many
times, and as it were tossing it; and some that give back the voice
louder than it came, some shriller and some deeper; yea, some render-
ing the voice, differing in the letters or articulate sound from that they
receive. We have also means to convey sounds in trunks and pipes,
in strange lines and distances.
Listening forward from A.D. 1600, Francis Bacon heard, in his mind's ear,
-- 8 of 9 --
11te Acoustic Designer 245
most of the sound inventions of the next three hundred fifty years (record-
ing and editing, modulation and transformation of sound, amplification,
broadcasting, telephones, headphones and hearing aids). It was all there in
embryo, waiting to be predicted by the thoughtful futurist.
But these instruments are now boring us to death. Now it is our tum
to anticipate what lies ahead of our ears and minds. You who would design
the future world, listen forward with immense leaps of the imagination
and intellect, listen forward fifty, one hundred, a thousand years. What do
you hear?
-- 9 of 9 --