Games. C. Thi Nguyen, Oxford University Press (2020). © Oxford University Press.
DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780190052089.001.0001
1
Agency as Art
Games can seem like an utterly silly way to spend one’s time. We struggle and
strain and sweat— and for what? The goals of games seem so arbitrary. Game
players burn energy and effort, not on curing cancer or saving the environ-
ment, but on trying to beat each other at some unnecessary, invented activity.
Why not spend that time on something real?
But the goals of a game aren’t actually arbitrary at all. They only seem arbi-
trary when we look in the wrong place. In the rest of life, we are used to justi-
fying our goals by looking at the value of the goals themselves or by looking
forward, to what follows from those goals. But with the goals of games, we
often need to look backward. We need to look at the value of the activity of
pursuing those goals. In ordinary practical life, we usually take the means for
the sake of the ends. But in games, we can take up an end for the sake of the
means. Playing games can be a motivational inversion of ordinary life.
Seeing this motivational structure will also help us to understand the
essential nature of games. A game tells us to take up a particular goal. It
designates abilities for us to use in pursuing that goal. It packages all that up
with a set of obstacles, crafted to fit those goals and abilities. A game uses all
these elements to sculpt a form of activity. And when we play games, we take
on an alternate form of agency. We take on new goals and accept different
sets of abilities. We give ourselves over to different—and focused—ways of
inhabiting our own agency. Goals, ability, and environment: these are the
means by which game designers practice their art. And we experience the
game designer’s art by flexing our own agency to fit.
Games, then, are a unique social technology. They are a method for
inscribing forms of agency into artifactual vessels: for recording them, pre-
serving them, and passing them around. And we possess a special ability: we
can be fluid with our agency; we can submerge ourselves in alternate agencies
designed by another. In other words, we can use games to communicate
forms of agency.
Games turn out to be part of the human practices of inscription. Painting
lets us record sights, music lets us record sounds, stories let us record
-- 1 of 23 --
2 Games
narratives, and games let us record agencies. That can be useful as part of our
development. Just as novels let us experiences lives we have not lived, games
let us experience forms of agency we might not have discovered on our own.
But those shaped experiences of agency can be valuable in themselves, as art.
Consider Sign, a product of the avant-garde wing of role-playing games,
by designers Kathryn Hymes and Hakan Seyalioglu. It’s a live-action role-
playing game about inventing language. The game is based on a true story.
In the 1970s, Nicaragua had no sign language; deaf children were deeply
isolated. Eventually, the government brought together deaf children from
across the country to form an experimental school, whose goal was to teach
those children to lip-read. Instead, the children collectively and spontane-
ously invented their own sign language. In the game Sign, the players take
up the roles of those children. The game assigns every player a backstory
and an inner truth each has always wanted to communicate. For example,
“I’m afraid one day I’ll be like my parents,” and “I’m afraid [my cat] Whiskers
thinks I’ve left her.”
The game is played in total silence. The only way to communicate is
through a new sign language, which the players must invent during the
game. There are three rounds. In every round, each player invents a single
sign and teaches it to the other players. Then all the players attempt to have
a free- form conversation, desperately struggling to communicate through
their tiny inventory of signs. Invented signs get used and modified; new signs
evolve spontaneously from old signs. Communication happens painfully
and slowly, with the occasional rare and luminous breakthrough. And every
time you feel that you are misunderstood, or do not understand somebody
else, you must take a marker and make a “compromise mark” on your hand.
The experience of the game is utterly marvelous. It is intense, absorbing,
frustrating, and surprisingly emotional. But to have that experience, the
players must commit, temporarily, to the goal of communicating their par-
ticular inner truths. And that commitment, combined with the particular
rules of the game, leads to a very concentrated practical experience. To play
Sign is to become entirely absorbed in the practical details of inventing lan-
guage and stabilizing meanings.
Here, then, is the particular motivational state of game playing which
I wish to investigate. The rules of the game tell us to care about something and
we start caring about it. A board game instructs us to care about collecting
one color of token. A video game tells us to care about stomping on little
mushroom people. A sport tells us to get a ball in a net. In order to achieve
-- 2 of 23 --
Agency as Art 3
that cherished state of absorbed play, we let that goal occupy our conscious-
ness, for a while. And the fact that the game designer specifies goals and abil-
ities for the player to take on—that is precisely what makes games distinctive
as an art form.1
Frameworks and Approaches
My interest here is in uncovering the unique potential and the special value
of games. There have been, in recent years, many arguments for the value
and importance of games. In many cases, however, these arguments tend to
avoid looking at some of the more unique qualities of games. Instead, they
assimilate games into some other, more respectable category of human prac-
tice. We’ve seen arguments that games are art because they are a type of fic-
tion (Tavinor 2009). We’ve seen arguments that games are a type of cinema,
one that adds a new technique—interactivity—to the familiar lexicon of cin-
ematic techniques (Gaut 2010). We’ve seen arguments that games are a kind
of conceptual art, which is valuable when it offers social critique (Flanagan
2013). We’ve seen arguments that games can be a special way of making
arguments, which can criticize economic and political systems by simulating
them (Frasca 2003; Bogost 2010). And surely, games can function in these
ways. Many modern video games are, indeed, a kind of fiction and a kind of
interactive cinema. And games can, as Ian Bogost puts it, function as a kind
of procedural rhetoric, making arguments by modeling causal systems in the
world. But I worry that overemphasizing these sorts of approaches may also
suppress our appreciation and understanding of the truly unique potential of
games.2,3
Over in the philosophy of sport, the value of game playing is usually
spelled out in terms of skills, excellences, and achievements. But notice that
this also cashes out the value of games in some very familiar currency. For
example, Tom Hurka argues that games are valuable because they enable
1 For simplicity’s sake, I will speak as if there is a single game designer, when in actuality, games are
often designed in large teams.
2 My account is moderately aligned, in spirit, with those scholars who call themselves ludologists,
who argue that games are a unique category and should be studied as such. For surveys of ludology,
and of the debate between narratology and ludology, see Nguyen (2017c) and Kirkpatrick (2011, 48–
86). For key texts of ludology, see Aarseth (1997); Frasca (1999); and Eskelinen (2001). I differ from
some of the classic positions in ludology in many of the details. In particular, see Chapters 3–6.
3 Much of the remainder of this chapter has been adapted from material that originally appeared in
Nguyen (2019d).
-- 3 of 23 --
4 Games
difficult achievements. But difficult achievements are, obviously, not con-
fined to games. Curing cancer and inventing a better mousetrap would also
be difficult achievements, and they would give us something useful besides.
This leads Hurka to conclude that playing games is generally less valuable
than engaging in more useful non-game activities. Science and philosophy
are valuable in the same way as games in offering difficult achievements, but
they are also valuable in other ways. They give us truth and understanding,
or at least some useful tools, as well as difficulty. Games can offer us only dif-
ficulty (Hurka 2006). Games might truly come into their own, says Hurka,
once we’ve solved all our practical problems and entered some sort of
techno- futurist Utopia. But in the meantime, we’re probably better off doing
something more useful with our lives. Notice that Hurka’s conclusion arises
precisely because he thinks games are valuable in virtue of something rather
commonplace—difficulty—rather than in virtue of something unique. Thus,
the value of games is easily superseded by the value of other, equally difficult
but more practical activities.
All these approaches miss much of what’s special about games. Games,
I will argue, are a distinctive art form. They offer us access to a unique ar-
tistic horizon and a distinctive set of social goods. They are special as an art
because they engage with human practicality—with our ability to decide and
to do. And they are special as a practical activity precisely because they are
an art. In ordinary life, we have to struggle to deal with whatever the world
throws at us, with whatever means we happen to have lying around. In ordi-
nary life, the form of our struggle is usually forced on us by an indifferent and
arbitrary world. In games, on the other hand, the form of our practical en-
gagement is intentionally and creatively configured by the game’s designers.
In ordinary life, we have to desperately fit ourselves to the practical demands
of the world. In games, we can engineer the world of the game, and the agency
we will occupy, to fit us and our desires. Struggles in games can be carefully
shaped in order to be interesting, fun, or even beautiful for the struggler.
This is enabled, in significant part, by the peculiar nature of our in-game
ends. Games ends are extremely different from the sorts of ends we stand
behind in ordinary life. Our values, in ordinary life, are largely recalci-
trant. Much of what we value seems universal and immoveable. We value
life, freedom, and happiness. Even with our personal values, there’s typically
little short- term flex. I care about art, creativity, and philosophy. Changing
my core values would take, at the very least, significant time and effort. My
core values are thick and recalcitrant. But game activity is different. We can
-- 4 of 23 --
Agency as Art 5
change our in-game ends easily and fluidly. We can adopt new ends, which
will guide our actions for the duration of the game, and then drop them in an
instant. When we play games, we take on temporary agencies—temporary
sets of abilities and constraints, along with temporary ends. We have a signif-
icant capacity for agential fluidity, and games make full use of that capacity.
Suits and Striving
Why think we have this strange capacity for agential fluidity? The best place
to start is Bernard Suits’s analysis of games. Let’s start with what Suits calls the
“portable version” of his definition:
Playing a game is the voluntary attempt to overcome unnecessary
obstacles. (Suits [1978] 2014, 43)
In a marathon, the point isn’t simply to get to the finish line. Usually, we
don’t actually care about being at that particular spot, in and of itself. We
know because we don’t try to get there as efficiently as possible. We don’t take
shortcuts, and we don’t take a taxi. The whole point is to get there within cer-
tain limitations. Suits contrasts game playing with what he calls “technical
activity.” In technical activity, there is some end that we value, and we pursue
it because of the value of that end. Since that end is genuinely valuable, we
try to pursue it as efficiently as we can. But in games, we don’t take the most
efficient route to our in-game ends. In game playing, we try to achieve some
specified end under certain specified inefficiencies. The end is largely valu-
able only when achieved inside those constraints. We can tell that this is our
motivational structure, precisely because we are willing to set up blockades
to that end. By itself, getting a ball through a stupid little basket has no inde-
pendent value on its own. I don’t go to the basketball court late at night with
a ladder and spend hours passing the ball through the hoop; nor do I pull
out my Monopoly set by myself, and roll myself around in heaps of Monopoly
money, glorying in all that I command. Getting the ball through the hoop or
holding Monopoly money in my hand is worthless outside of the constraints
and structure of the game.
We must distinguish carefully here between the goals of a game and our
purpose in playing a game. The goal of a game is the target we aim at during
the game: getting to the finish line first, making more baskets, maximizing
-- 5 of 23 --
6 Games
points. Our purpose with a game, on the other hand, is our reason for playing
the game in the first place. Our purpose in playing a game might be to have
some fun, to get some exercise, to de-stress, to develop our skills, to van-
quish our opponents, to achieve some difficult task, or even to experience the
beauty of our own skilled action.
For some game players, goal and purpose can be one and the same. A pro-
fessional poker player is just in it for the money; an Olympic sprinter just
wants to win, period—for these players, the goal is the purpose. Winning is
genuinely valuable for them. For other game players, the goal and purpose
are distinct, but achieving the purpose follows from achieving the goal in a
straightforward way. This basketball player wants to win for the sake of fame
and status; this Starcraft 2 professional wants to win the tournament for the
prize money. For these types of players, winning is only a means to their true
purpose, but winning is still genuinely valuable to them.
What Suits exposes, however, is another, entirely different motivational
structure: that our goal and purpose in a game might be entirely skew to one
another. When I play a party game with my friends, my goal is to win, but my
purpose is to have fun. The way to have fun is to try, during the game, to win.
But I don’t really care if I win or not—not in any lasting way. I have to chase
the goal of winning to fulfill my purpose, but I don’t actually need to win in
order to have fun. Winning, in this case, is rather incidental to my true pur-
pose. In fact, if I start up a game of Charades for the sake of having a little fun,
but I am so aggressive and competitive that I make everybody else miser-
able, then I may have succeeded in achieving the goals of the game, but I have
failed entirely in my purpose.
Suits took himself to be offering a complete account of games and game
playing. For this he has been roundly criticized. There are, as many have
pointed out, aspects of game playing that do not conform to Suits’s theory.
Some games involve no real struggle against obstacles at all, such as certain
children’s games of make-believe. Certain narratively oriented tabletop role-
playing games, like Fiasco, and narrative computer games, like The Stanley
Parable, also don’t seem oriented around struggles and obstacles. I agree with
these criticisms. I do not think Suits has provided a complete account of all
forms of game playing.4 But we should not throw away Suits’s analysis en-
tirely, just because he failed in his stated goal. Let us adapt Suits’s analysis and
4 Criticism of Suits on this point is a common refrain; see Upton (2015, 2016) for a representative
example. I provide an extended analysis of the relationship between make-believe play and striving
play, and an argument against Suits’s account of games being a complete one, in Nguyen (2019b).
-- 6 of 23 --
Agency as Art 7
treat it, instead, as an exceedingly insightful description of one particular—
but very important—form of game play. For the remainder of this book, I will
focus on understanding those games and playings that fit the Suitsian defini-
tion.5 For the sake of brevity, whenever I simply use the bare term game, I can
be taken to be referring to Suitsian games.
A more significant worry is that Suitsian play is necessarily immature
and unworthy of serious attention. Suitsian games always involve practical
struggles. We become absorbed in the instrumental activity of overcoming
obstacles and achieving seemingly arbitrary goals. And it is precisely these
aspects that can make game playing seem like a lesser activity. For example,
media critic Andrew Darley condemns video games for offering only “sur-
face play” and “direct sensorial stimulation.” Says Darley: “Computer games
are machine-like: they solicit intense concentration from the player who is
caught up in their mechanisms . . . leaving little room for reflection other
than an instrumental type of thinking that is more or less commensurate
with their own workings” (Darley 2000; as quoted in Lopes 2010, 117). The
same worry recurs in the new wave of games scholarship, even among some
of games’ most ardent defenders. These scholars often argue for the worth
of games by pointing out how games can offer us rich content, beyond mere
instrumental challenges. Such arguments often proceed by highlighting the
capacity of games to represent. For example, Ian Bogost argues for the value
of games by showing that games can be a form of rhetoric, making arguments
via their ability to simulate the world. Bogost points to games like McDonald’s
Video Game. In that game, you run the McDonald’s corporation. Your goal is
to maximize profits while protecting the environment. But when you play
the game, you quickly discover that you actually pull off both of these goals.
The game argues, through its simulation, that the goals of capitalism and the
goals of environmentalism are essentially at odds (Bogost 2010, 28–31). John
Sharp reserves his highest praise for those games that move beyond the “her-
metically sealed” experiences of merely solving the game, and instead rep-
resent and comment on the world. Sharp highlights Mary Flanagan’s game
Career Moves, which resembles that old family game The Game of Life, but
5 Some readers may agree with me that Suitsian games are only one type of game; others might
think that all games are Suitsian games. My argument should be palatable to both. Even those
Wittgensteinians who maintain that the term game is essentially indefinable should be able to find
my analysis somewhat palatable, by treating the category of “Suitsian games” as an artificial stipula-
tion. I am not interested in debating whether or not the category of Suitsian games does or does not
match up with some bit of natural language; I am interested in the fact that the category is clearly
specified and useful, and applies to a broad range of human activities.
-- 7 of 23 --
8 Games
forces players to make stereotypically gendered career choices for their fe-
male character in order to cause them to reflect on gender biases in the work-
place (Sharp 2015, 77–97). Flanagan herself praises Gonzolo Frasca’s game
September 12th: A Toy World, a pointedly political game in which one plays
the United States, dropping bombs by drone on an unnamed Middle Eastern
locale, attempting to kill terrorists, only to find that all their efforts only de-
stroy innocent civilians and increase the number of terrorists (Flanagan
2013, 239– 240).
Notice that these sorts of accountings pick out a very particular type
of game as genuinely respectable. September 12th, Career Moves, and
McDonald’s Video Game may not present very interesting instrumental
challenges, but that lack is unimportant by these lights. These games are good
in virtue of what they represent. Underneath all these approaches seems to
be the presumption that Suitsian play—the play of skills and clearly defined
goals—cannot be valuable in any really deep or fulfilling way. These accounts
seem motivated by the need to find some other footing from which to estab-
lish the value of games.
But I think we ought not dismiss instrumental play so quickly. That dis-
missal arises, I think, from misunderstanding the richly varied motiva-
tional structures involved in game playing. Let’s return to the distinction
between goals and purposes. This distinction helps us see that there are
two very different modes of play. First, you might be playing for the sake of
winning. You want the win either for its own sake or for the sake of some-
thing that follows from winning, such as goods and money.6 Let’s call this
achievement play. Professional poker players who play for money, Olympic
athletes who play for honor, and people who simply play to win are all
achievement players. In achievement play, goal and purpose are aligned.
Alternately, you might be pursuing the win for the sake of the struggle.
6 It should be noted that the term winning here is slightly imprecise. There are many other sorts of
states we can pursue in games. For example, one might have lost the opportunity to actually win in
particular chess match, but one can still play on, aiming to achieve a stalemate rather than an out-
right loss. For another, as Suits points out, many games don’t have victory condition, but only loss
conditions. For example: a ping-pong volley, where we try to keep the ball going as long as possible,
has no win condition, only a loss condition, and the goal of the activity is to stave off the loss for as
long as possible. Technically, what I should be discussing here is not “winning” but the pursuit of
the lusory goal, in its various shades and forms. However, I will use the term winning loosely, from
here on out, to refer to the larger notion of the pursuits of lusory goals, and use the terms achieving
a victory and winning proper to refer to the narrower notion. I do not use the term success because
I think its natural use is ambiguous between win-related concepts and our larger purposes for playing
a game. My spouse will say that our playing of a party game was “successful” if it was fun for all in-
volved, regardless of whether she did well by the internal standard of the game.
-- 8 of 23 --
Agency as Art 9
Let’s call that striving play. In striving play, goal and purpose are skew. An
achievement player plays to win. A striving player acquires, temporarily, an
interest in winning for the sake of the struggle. Thus, striving play involves
a motivational inversion from ordinary life. In ordinary practical life, we
pursue the means for the sake of the ends. But in striving play, we pursue
the ends for the sake of the means. We take up a goal for the sake of the ac-
tivity of struggling for it.
This motivational inversion is, in my eyes, the most interesting possibility
raised by the Suitsian analysis. I will largely focus my analysis on striving
play, not because I think it is the superior form of play, but because I think
it is the more convoluted, more fascinating, and most frequently misunder-
stood form of play. Thinking about striving play will teach us something re-
markable about ourselves, as rational agents who are capable of entering into
such motivational inversions.
But first, let’s take a step back. Does striving play really exist? I think it
is quite commonplace, in fact. For example: my spouse and I took up rac-
quetball in order to keep fit in a moderately entertaining way. When we play
racquetball, I try with all my might to win. And my trying to win—my actu-
ally caring about winning, during the course of the game—is quite useful.
Wanting to win helps my fitness by getting me to try harder during the
game; it also helps the process to be engaging and compelling. In order to
obtain those benefits, I need to induce in myself an interest in winning. But
that interest is only temporary, and disconnected from my larger and more
enduring ends.
We can see how disconnected and short-term that interest is by looking
at how I strategically manipulate my ability to win in the long term. Suppose
somebody were to offer me free racquetball lessons. Taking these lessons
would cause me to jump far ahead of my spouse in skill. If I were an achieve-
ment player, I should certainly take them. But, as a matter of fact, I wouldn’t
actually take those lessons. If either my spouse or myself pulled substantially
ahead of the other in skill, the game would turn quite unpleasant for both of
us. Our matches would lose their interest and sparkle. We’d probably end up
giving up racquetball altogether. In other words: in my long-term life, I make
strategic decisions that keep my skill in check and prevent me from win-
ning too many games. I manipulate my capacity to win, with an eye toward
maintaining a desirable sort of struggle. But during the game itself, I play all
out to win. If my decision to forego those lessons is comprehensible, then
striving play is a real motivational possibility.
-- 9 of 23 --
10 Games
Consider, also, what we might call “stupid games.” Stupid games have the
following characteristics: first, they are only fun if you try to win; and second,
the fun part is when you fail. There are a great many stupid games, including
many drinking games and party games. Take the game Twister, in which you
try to keep in balance as long as you can, but the funniest part is when every-
body collapses on top of each other. My own favorite stupid game is Bag on
Your Head, a ludicrous party game in which everybody puts a brown paper
grocery bag on their head. The goal of the game is to try to take the bags off
other people’s heads. When somebody takes the bag off your head, you’re out,
and you have to go to the side of the room and leave play. The game, of course,
involves lots of stumbling and tripping and flailing around by people with
bags on their heads. And the best vantage point from to watch all this is that
of the losers, watching from the side. And, at some point, there will be only
one person still stumbling blindly around the room with a bag on their head,
fumbling around for the other nonexistent opponents, while everybody else
gets to watch, desperately trying not to laugh. That last person is the winner,
and the very best part of the game is seeing how long it takes them to figure
out that they have, in fact, won.
The children’s game of Telephone is also a stupid game. You may remember
the game from your childhood. To play, everybody sits in a circle. The
starting player thinks of a message and then whispers it to the next person in
the circle. Each player passes the message on, whispering it to the next player,
until the message makes its way all around the circle. Then the players com-
pare the original version with the circulated version. The circulated version
is, inevitably, wildly distorted, much to everybody’s amusement. We play the
game because it’s funny, and the funny part is failing, but it’s only funny if
our attempts to communicate really are failures. And that failure is real only
if the players really did earnestly try to communicate clearly. Imagine if we
played Telephone, but we intentionally tried to distort the message. There
would be no actual failure, and thus no hilarity. In Twister and Telephone, to
have the desired experience—a funny failure—the players must pursue suc-
cess. But success isn’t the point. Stupid games cannot be properly played by
achievement players, only by striving players. Stupid games make sense only
if striving play is possible.
And if striving play is possible, it must also be that we have a further ca-
pacity. We must be able to submerge ourselves in the temporary agency of the
game. In order to engage in striving play, I must be able to take on a dispos-
able end. That is, I must be able to bring myself to temporarily care about an
-- 10 of 23 --
Agency as Art 11
end, and for that end to appear to me as final. But I also must be able to dis-
pose of that end afterward. Why must submersion in a temporary agency be
possible? Why must we be able to take on disposable ends?
Imagine what it would be like if we could not submerge ourselves in this
way. Imagine a striving player who can only pursue game ends in the normal,
transparently instrumental fashion—who cannot become submerged in an
alternate agency. The purpose of such players in play is having a struggle, and
that purpose is perpetually before their minds and active in their reasoning.
This striving player, then, can’t really pursue the game end wholeheartedly. If
we are always constantly aware of, and fully motivated by, our broader pur-
pose in striving play, then our struggles to achieve victory would curiously
be undercut. In any game without a time limit, if victory were in our grasp, it
would be entirely reasonable to delay the victory in order to have more of the
activity of striving.7 But this would be very odd behavior, and would defeat
much of the point of striving play.
A friend of mine relates the following story: his ten-year- old son was
beating my friend badly at Monopoly. The son was very much enjoying the
experience. My friend discovered that every time he was about to lose, his
son would sneak him some extra cash just to keep the game going. The son
just wanted to extend the experience, to keep on beating his father forever.
The story is funny precisely because the son is missing something crucial
about how game playing works. In order to be absorbed in a game, we must
behave as if winning were a final end. That end must phenomenally engulf
us, if we are to be gripped by the game and if its thrills and threats are to have
emotional punch for us. We must pursue the goals of the game wholeheart-
edly, putting our larger purpose out of mind. In other words, we must sub-
merge ourselves in a temporary agency.
Aesthetic Experiences of One’s Own Activity
Stupid games are not the point of our inquiry; they are merely a blunt example
to show the possibility of striving play. I’m interested in showing that games
can be an art form. So, let’s start by thinking about how games can support
aesthetic experiences. (I do not mean to imply that aim of art is exclusively
to provide aesthetic experiences, but only that it is one of the characteristic
7 This excellent point was originally raised to me by Christopher Yorke.
-- 11 of 23 --
12 Games
functions of art to do so.) The recent discussion of game aesthetics has largely
focused on thinking about games as a form of fiction (Tavinor 2017, 2009;
Robson and Meskin 2016). What we lack is an aesthetics of Suitsian play.
So: consider the category of aesthetic striving play— that is, game play en-
gaged in for the sake of the aesthetic quality of the struggle. Can striving re-
ally give rise to aesthetic qualities, and what would those be like? Let’s start
with some paradigmatically aesthetic qualities: those of gracefulness and el-
egance. We obviously attribute such aesthetic qualities to particular playings
of games, especially from the spectators’ perspective. Sports spectatorship,
for example, is full of talk of the beauty and elegance of athletic motion. But
the spectator’s perspective is not the end of the story. There are distinctive
aesthetic qualities available primarily to the causally active game player.
These are aesthetic qualities of acting, deciding, and solving.
And those aesthetic qualities can arise, not just for our actions in isolation,
but also for our actions as practically functional. Some actions are beautiful
because of what they get done. Consider the difference between two super-
ficially similar activities: dancing freely and rock climbing. Dancing freely—
as I do by myself with my headphones on—can be an aesthetic experience.
My own movements can feel to me expressive, dramatic, and, once in a rare
while, even a bit graceful. I also rock climb, and rock climbing is full of aes-
thetic experiences. Climbers praise particular climbs for having interesting
movement or beautiful flow. But, unlike many traditional forms of dance,
climbing aims at overcoming obstacles. The climbing experiences that linger
most potently in my mind are experiences of movement as the solution to
a problem— of my deliberateness and gracefulness that got me through a
delicate sequence of holds (Nguyen 2017a). Dancing may occasionally be a
game, but climbing is essentially a game. It is unnecessary obstacles, taken on
for the activity of trying to overcome them.
Take another paradigmatically aesthetic property: harmony. When chess
players discover a move that elegantly escapes a trap, the harmony of the
move— the lovely fit between the challenge and the solution—is available
both to themselves and to outsiders. But something more is available espe-
cially to players: a special experience of harmony between their abilities and
the challenges of the world. When your abilities are pushed to their max-
imum, when your mind or body is just barely able to do what’s required, when
your abilities are just barely enough to cope with the situation at hand—that
is an experience of harmony available primarily to the players themselves. It
is a harmony between self and challenge, between the practical self and the
-- 12 of 23 --
Agency as Art 13
obstacles of its world. It is a harmony of a practical fit between your whole self
and the world.
This, it seems to me, is a paradigmatic aesthetic experience of playing
games. Once we’ve seen it, we can see that aesthetic experiences with this
character exist outside of games. I value philosophy because I value truth,
but I also savor the feel of that beautiful moment of epiphany, when I finally
find that argument that I was groping for. Games can provide consciously
sculpted versions of those everyday experiences. There is a natural aesthetic
pleasure to working through a difficult math proof; chess seems designed,
at least in part, to concentrate and refine that pleasure for its own sake. In
ordinary practical life, we catch momentary glimpses, when we are lucky, of
harmony between our abilities and our tasks. But often, there is no such har-
mony. Our abilities fall far short of the tasks; or, the tasks are horribly dull.
But we can design games for the sake of this harmony of practical fit. In our
games, the obstacles are designed to be solved by the human mind and the
human body— unlike, say, the tasks of curing cancer or grading. John Dewey
suggested that many of the arts are crystallizations of ordinary human expe-
rience (Dewey [1934] 2005). Fiction is the crystallization of telling people
about what happened; visual arts are the crystallization of looking around
and seeing; music is the crystallization of listening. Games, I claim, are the
crystallization of practicality. Aesthetic experiences of action are natural and
occur outside of games all the time. Fixing a broken car engine, figuring out
a math proof, managing a corporation, even getting into a bar fight—each
can have its own particular interest and beauty. These include the satisfaction
of finding an elegant solution to an administrative problem, of dodging per-
fectly around an unexpected obstacle. These experiences are wonderful—but
in the wild, they are far too rare. Games can concentrate those experiences.
When we design games, we can sculpt the shape of the activity to make beau-
tiful action more likely. And games can intensify and refine those aesthetic
qualities, just as a painting can intensify and refine the aesthetic qualities we
find in the natural sights and sounds of the world.
Aesthetic striving games, then, are games designed primarily for the pur-
pose of providing aesthetic experiences of practicality to their players. Notice
that the categories of aesthetic striving games and aesthetic striving players
do not quite always align. A game could have been originally designed to pro-
mote achievement, but certain players might take it up for aesthetic striving.
Or an achievement player could take up an aesthetic striving game simply
because they wanted to win, but be led by the game’s design into having
-- 13 of 23 --
14 Games
aesthetic experiences along the way. But, in most cases, aesthetic striving
games seem made for aesthetic striving players.
Let’s return to Sign. Sign is distinctive in several ways. In many other
role- playing games, such as Fiasco, the relationship of player to char-
acter is theatrical. Players may choose to have their characters act
counterproductively—against that character’s goals—because it would be
narratively meaningful. In such a game, I might choose to act out how my
character, a sad-sack con man, unwisely confesses his crimes to a pretty
stranger in a bar. It is an idiotic choice for my character, and works against
all his goals, but I made the choice because I thought it would make for a
satisfying narrative arc. Sign, on the other hand, is a striving game. Each
player must take up the goal of communicating their inner truth, pursuing
it wholeheartedly in order to have the desired experience. But the players
themselves aren’t really interested in winning in any enduring sense. Their
larger purpose is to experience the precise texture of struggling, flailing,
and barely managing to communicate. But one will only be gripped by these
experiences if one genuinely tries to win during the game.
The fact that Sign is an aesthetic striving game is particularly clear to me
now that I have added my own house rule. I have decreed that, at the end of
the game, nobody will explain what their inner truth was; nor will they say
what they thought anybody else’s truth was. Nobody ever gets to find out if,
in fact, we have successfully communicated with each other, even though we
pursued that goal during the game. My players and I all agree that this house
rule improves the strange potency of the game, and that it is very much in the
spirit of the thing. This house rule would be absurd if we actually cared about
winning in any enduring way. But it is perfectly comprehensible if winning
is only a temporarily adopted interest, taken up for the aesthetic qualities of
the pursuit.
The Artistic Medium of Games
So how do game designers fashion these aesthetically rich struggles? It
will be useful here to think in terms of the artistic medium of games. Let’s
follow Joseph Margolis’s suggestion and distinguish between a physical
medium and an artistic medium (Margolis 1980, 1–42; Davies 2003, 183).
Or, as Dominic Lopes puts it, an artistic medium is not merely a certain set
of materials, but a set of “technical resources” (Lopes 2014, 133–139). For
-- 14 of 23 --
Agency as Art 15
example, in paintings, the physical medium consists of pigments applied to
a surface, while the artistic medium includes various techniques, including
brushstrokes.
So: is there some sort of artistic medium in common to all aesthetic
striving games? What is the medium of games? The medium, whatever it is,
must be quite abstract if it is to cover the wide variety of Suitsian games—
which includes video games, board games, role-playing games, card games,
sports, and party games. The medium couldn’t be something as specific as,
say, software, interactive video, or boards and pieces.8
First, it is tempting to say that the medium of games is constraints and
obstacles. Certainly, that’s part of the story, but it doesn’t capture the full rich-
ness of the game designer’s efforts. That view might seem plausible if we nar-
rowly focus on only physical games, such as traditional sports. Traditional
sports are played in the physical world with our actual bodies. Thus, the rules
of a sport usually start with our physical bodies, with our full range of abili-
ties, and then selectively restricts our use of those abilities. For example, we
might disallow the use of hands in soccer, or the use of punching and kicking
in basketball. But game designers actually create new sorts of actions and
possibilities all the time.9 This is clearest in video games such as Portal, where
I am given a gun that can shoot the ends of a wormhole into the world to
create space- bending passageways. But we need not focus solely on such rad-
ically new abilities. Most games create new actions. “Taking a piece” in Chess
and “a home run” in baseball are new actions that arise only within the con-
text of a particular rule set.
In that case, we might be tempted to say, instead, that the artistic medium
of games is rules. And perhaps this is right, if we have a sufficiently loose no-
tion of “rule.” But under most standard uses of the term, this proposal doesn’t
work either. Say that you mean by “rule” an explicit, stated principle for ac-
tion that is mentally upheld by the players. First, as many computer-game
scholars have pointed out, much of what computer-game designers do is de-
sign the virtual environment through software manipulations. The software
environment is not a set of rules consciously held by a player; it has some inde-
pendent existence (Leino 2012). Of course, you might think that the software
8 If the reader has a particular theory of medium here that forbids such abstraction, please sub-
stitute the term “artistic resource,” as borrowed from Riggle (2010). For a useful discussion of how
abstract a medium might be, see Elisabeth Schellekens’s discussion of ideas as the medium of concep-
tual art (Schellekens 2007).
9 Cardona-Rivera and Young (2014) offer a useful survey of work on game affordances.
-- 15 of 23 --
16 Games
code itself is a set of rules, just rules that run on a computer rather than on a
human brain. But even so, there’s more to game design than rules. The case is
clearest with physical games. Think, for example, about obstacle courses and
artificial rock climbs. What fills out the experience are the physical details
of the material object, and how that particular physicality interacts with the
specified rules and the goals of the game. The physicality of games extends
even to video games. A rule might tell you to use a particular game-console
controller, but the physicality of the controller itself partially conditions the
gaming experience.10 The video game PewPewPewPewPewPewPewPewPew
illustrates this quite nicely. In the game, two people together control a single
avatar, who has a jetpack and a ray gun. Both players have microphones. One
player controls the jetpack by shouting “Shhhh!” into the microphone; the
other player controls the gun by shouting “Pew! Pew! Pew!” into the micro-
phone. Imagine the different texture of practical experience if the game were
played with buttons instead. And even when played with microphones, so
much depends on the physical details—the sensitivity of the microphones,
the acoustics of the room. These aren’t just rules—they are environmental
features. What unites software environments and physical environments is
their relationship to challenge. We might say, then, that part of the medium is
the practical environment— the environment conceived of in its opposition to
our goals and abilities.
This points us toward the last key element of game design—the goal.
Reiner Knizia, elder statesman of German board-game design, has said that
the central tool in his game-design arsenal is the scoring system. The scoring
system creates the motivation, says Knizia (Knizia, quoted in Chalkey 2008).
The scoring system tells you whether you need to collaborate or compete
with the other players. And the scoring system helps shape how that interac-
tion will go. The goals, combined with the game’s mechanics, tell us whether
we are to manipulate our opponents or bargain with them, whether we are to
cleverly profit off their actions or simply attack them. A game’s goals tell us
what to care about during the game. When we play a game, we simply take on
the goals it indicates, and acquire the motivations that the game wishes us to
acquire.
Think about a board-game night between friends. We sit around the table
and pull out a new board game that has just arrived in the mail, taking off the
10 For a study of the aesthetics of our physical interaction with video-game controllers, see
Kirkpatrick (2011, 87–116).
-- 16 of 23 --
Agency as Art 17
shrink wrap. We pop out the cardboard tokens into a great heap on the table
and begin to sort them into neat piles of green tokens, blue tokens, and gold
tokens. We don’t know what these tokens will represent; the physical tokens
themselves have no particular importance. If, for instance, my dog eats all
the blue tokens, we can replace them with pennies and still be able to play
the game. Now we open the rule book, which tells us that the gold tokens are
money, and that they are useful for buying various resources during the game
but don’t count toward victory at the end. The winner will be the person who
has collected the most green tokens. Notice that before the game starts, we
have no interest in collecting green tokens. But during the game, we acquire
a hearty interest in the green tokens, to the point where an insufficiency of
tokens may inspire armpit sweats, jitters, and a surge of adrenaline at the
prospect of pulling off a last-ditch plan to get more. And once the game is fin-
ished, we lose our interest in the green tokens entirely, shove all of them into
a messy pile, and scoop them into a Ziploc plastic bag.
What the Suitsian analysis suggests is that games are structures of practical
reason, practical action, and practical possibility, conjoined with a partic-
ular world in which that practicality will operate. A game designer designates
this as the goal of the game player, and those as the permitted abilities, and
that as the landscape of obstacles. The designer creates, not only the world in
which players will act, but the skeleton of the players’ practical agency within
that world. The designer designates players’ abilities and goals in the game.
The designer’s control over the nature of the players’ agency is part of how
the game designer sculpts the game’s activity. Games can offer us more finely
tuned practical harmonies because the designers have control over both
world and agent.
We now have an answer to the question of artistic medium. The common
artistic medium of aesthetic striving games—the technical resources by
which the game designer sculpts practical experience—are the goals, the
rules, and the environment that these various parts animate into a system
of constraints. The game designer crafts for players a very particular form
of struggle, and does so by crafting both a temporary practical agency for
us to inhabit and a practical environment for us to struggle against. In other
words, the medium of the game designer is agency. If you want a slogan, try
this one: games are the art of agency.
Note that I haven’t offered anything like a definition of agency. This is in-
tentional. I do not take there to be a settled account of agency in general, and
that literature is currently undergoing a number of upheavals. Much of this
-- 17 of 23 --
18 Games
change is due to challenges regarding the possible existence of group agents
and collective agents, such as companies and corporations, and other edge
cases, including animal agency, robot agency, and the agency of algorithms
(Barandiaran, Di Paolo, and Rohde 2009; List and Pettit 2011; Gilbert 2013).
When I speak of agency, I am generally thinking in terms of a fairly tradi-
tional conception—in which agency involves intentional action, or action for
a reason. I am in no way presuming that this is a complete account of agency.
I don’t think we need a full definition or metaphysical account of “paper”
to usefully say that origami uses the medium of paper folding, and I don’t
think we need to settle on a particular philosophical account of “agency” to
usefully say that games use the medium of agency. In fact, I think that investi-
gating how games work in the medium of agency will actually teach us some-
thing about the nature of our agency.
But this basic idea— that games work in the medium of agency—reveals
something quite profound about the role games can play in human life, es-
pecially in our social lives. Games turn out to be a way of writing down forms
of agency, of inscribing them in an artifact. Games are one of our techniques
for inscribing and recording bits of human experience. We have devel-
oped methods for recording stories: novels, poetry, film, and other kinds
of narrative. We have developed methods for capturing sights: drawing,
painting, photography, and film. We have developed methods for capturing
sounds: written music, recording technologies, and wooden duck calls.
We have even developed methods for capturing sequences of action to be
performed—cookbook directions, dance choreography, and stage directions.
Games are a method for capturing forms of agency. And these techniques
and technologies enable all sorts of interactions and modifications. Once we
can write something down, that enables us to more easily study and refine it.
And this suggests another possibility: that games can be a way that we col-
laborate in the project of developing our agency and autonomy. If games can
record and transmit forms of agency, then I can learn new modes of agency
from a game. And you may write down a useful form of agency and pass it
to me through a game. This may, in the abstract, seem slightly insane. But
I think it is, in fact, quite plausible, especially when we think of what we ac-
tually learn from games. I am not alone in thinking that I acquired a cer-
tain focused, logical, and tactical mindset from playing chess. Rock climbing
taught me to focus precisely on my balance and precision of motion. Tetris
gave me the mental state required to pack my trunk optimally for a trip. My
suggestion here is more than the familiar old saw that games teach us skills
-- 18 of 23 --
Agency as Art 19
and develop our abilities. My claim is that games can teach us the agential
mindsets behind those skills—the pairings of a particular kind of interest
with a focus on a particular set of abilities. And the practice of striving play
itself teaches us how to be flexible with our agency—how to pick up and set
aside interests for a moment. That flexibility is of great use outside of game.
We use our agential flexibility when we switch between our various roles,
such as parent, professional, and friend, and adopt the different frames of
mind that go with such roles.
As it turns out, the development of our agency and autonomy is not a
solitary project. As with many of our other aspects—our scientific under-
standing, our logical capacities, our morality—we can help each other in the
project of personal self-development, and we often do so, not just in person,
but through artifactual vessels. And games are an artifactual vessel with
which we can communicate modes of agency. The games that we have made
constitute a vast library of agency, in which we have recorded a wide variety
of different forms of agencies and which we can use to explore different ways
of being an agent. And it is our capacity to submerge ourselves in alternate
agencies that makes it possible for us to use this library.
Games and Artificiality
But games also offer one more promise. They can function as a refuge from
the inhospitality of ordinary life. In practical life, the world is mostly fixed,
and our values, relatively inflexible. Most of us cannot help but desire com-
pany, food, success. The recalcitrant world and our inflexible values generate
certain obstacles. These are not the obstacles we wanted to struggle against,
but they are the ones we must overcome in order to get what we want. So we
must try to sculpt ourselves and our abilities to fit the needs of the world. The
world tells us we must eat, so we must find a job and pretend to ourselves that
we enjoy it. The world tells us that we must find romantic partners, so we
learn to be witty, or at least to make to make a decent online dating profile.
The world tells us that if we wish to be professional philosophers, we must
grade an endless sea of student papers, no matter how mind-numbing we
find the task. So we put nose to grindstone and force our way through.
In games, on the other hand, we sculpt for ourselves exactly the kind
of practical activity we wish to engage in. We pick the goals, abilities, and
the world. In games, our abilities can precisely suit the challenges we are
-- 19 of 23 --
20 Games
presented with. In Super Mario Brothers, we are given the ability to run and
jump, and a world full of chasms to jump over and monsters to jump upon.
What’s more, our jumping abilities and speed in Super Mario Brothers are
just barely enough to cope with the chasms and monsters we face. The chess
knight’s strange leaping movement is just what we need to break through our
opponent’s defenses. In games, we are given the right kinds of abilities, but
just barely enough of them— which creates drama and interest. And not only
do the abilities fit, but their exercise is often pleasurable and interesting and
exciting, at least when we’ve found the right game for our tastes.
How unlike our own dreary world this is! Our abilities sometimes fit our
goals in the world, but so often they do not. We want to invent a cure for
cancer, but lack the capacities to do it. We wish to help students learn to write
better, but the process is boring and mind-numbing and provokes occa-
sional thoughts of suicide—or at least of throwing it all in and becoming a
lawyer instead. We do not fit this world comfortably. The obstacles in our
path are often intractable, exhausting, or miserable. Games can be an exis-
tential balm for our practical unease with the world. In games, the problems
can be right-sized for our capacities; our in-game selves can be right-sized
for the problems; and the arrangement of self and world can make solving the
problems pleasurable, satisfying, interesting, and beautiful.
Even with our opponents, there is a harmony. In a good game, our
opponent’s attempts to harm us may, in the right circumstances, actually be
channeled so as to create experiences we value. In ordinary life, social attacks
and financial attacks are usually painful and unpleasant. They can be survived
and gotten over, but rarely can they be enjoyed. But games are often designed
such that your attacks on me are channeled into interesting obstacles for me
to overcome. Even our motivations can be curiously harmonized, even if we
are at each other’s throats. Outside of games, much of the pain and difficulty
of social life with others arises from the dizzying plurality of values. Each
of us cares about different things; trying to mesh the plurality of disparate
values into livable communities is incredibly difficult.
In games, values are usually singular and shared. In games, each person
is a simplified agent. And in most cases, competing agents are pursuing the
same goal. When we are playing tennis, I do not have to cope with subtle
differences between your and my view of the good. You and I are after ex-
actly the same thing: points and victory. It is not that we are cooperating,
exactly—but we are motivationally coherent to one another. In some sense,
the motivational world described by traditional economics—one in which
-- 20 of 23 --
Agency as Art 21
identically motivated rational actors compete with one another—is false in
the actual world, but true in game worlds. When games work, they can some-
times present us with the world as we wish it could be. The worlds of games
are harmonious and interesting worlds, where even our worst impulses are
transformed into the pleasure of others. In ordinary life, we must build prac-
tical activities and relationships from gears that were never made to fit. But in
games, we can machine all the gears to fit from the start.
And this, I suspect, is both the great promise and the great threat of
games. Games can offer us a clarifying balm against the vast, compli-
cated, ever-shifting social world of pluralistic values, and an existential
balm against our internal sense that our values are slippery and unclear.
In games, values are clear, well-delineated, and typically uniform among
all agents. But this also creates a significant moral danger—not just from
graphically violent games, but from all games. This is the danger of ex-
porting back to the world a false expectation: that values should be clear,
well-delineated, and uniform in all circumstances. Games threaten us with
a fantasy of moral clarity.
The positive part of my view might seem rather familiar. Jane McGonigal
makes a similar point in her argument for making our lives more game-
like. The world wasn’t made to fit us, she says, but games can be made to fit.
Playing games is far more pleasurable; our motivations in games are more
potent. Thus, concludes McGonigal, we should try to make life more like
a game, by gamifying our work, our chores, and our education. We should
fill our lives with leaderboards, rankings, and badges, and fill our work with
carefully engineered gamified systems, in order to make our work and educa-
tional lives more pleasant (McGonigal 2011).
But this mistakes how peculiar game values are. We can tailor our struggles
in games precisely because our game ends are disposable. But when we try to
make the rest of life like a game, we will need to adapt our enduring ends to
make the struggle more pleasurable and satisfying. When we do that—when
we instrumentalize our enduring ends as if our lives are a game—we court
disaster. When we gamify our ordinary lives, we will be tempted to shift and
simplify our ends for the sake of the struggle—but then we are no longer be
aiming at the same target. Games can be safely tailored precisely because they
are games.
Games involve taking on temporary ends and submerging ourselves in
alternate agencies. And, like any other form of art, exactly the features that
make games potentially valuable also make them potentially dangerous.
-- 21 of 23 --
22 Games
Games are the art form of agency, and it is in their use of agency where we
will find both a great promise and a significant threat.
I have sketched here the broad strokes of my view. The rest of the book will
explore, in greater detail, these arguments and possibilities.
In Part I, I focus on the motivational structure of game play. First, in
Chapter 2, I defend the possibility of striving play against skeptics. In
Chapter 3, I explore our capacity for submerging ourselves in alternate
agencies and our ability to forget our enduring ends for the span of the game.
And I draw lessons for philosophical agency and practical reasoning from
the fact that we can play games. Together, these two chapters are the core of
my theoretical account of the motivational structure of game play. They are
the philosophically densest chapters, but also the heart of the story.
In Chapter 4, I argue that games can play a special role in the develop-
ment of our own agency and autonomy. Games can communicate modes of
agency. And when we play games, we can learn new modes of agency. Games
can constitute a library of agencies, and we can use that library to grow.
In Part II, I focus on games as an art form. In Chapter 5, I explore the aes-
thetics of agency. Beauty is not just confined to sunsets and symphonies; our
own actions, choices, and decisions can also have their own kind of beauty.
I also defend the aesthetics of agency against the worries that aesthetic ex-
perience is essentially incompatible with practical and instrumental states
of mind.
In Chapter 6, I argue that games are like traditional art works in some
very significant ways. Most importantly, games involve socially maintained
prescriptions for attention—they are a way of framing certain parts of the
world for our appreciation. Games are a way of aesthetically framing our own
practical activity.
In Chapter 7, I look at how games are distinctive as an art form. Unlike
most traditional arts, the aesthetic qualities of a game arise, not in the artifact
itself, but in the activity of the player. Thus, the aesthetic qualities of games
are significantly distanced from the designer and the game itself. Game
designers must cope with a distinctive artistic difficulty: they must achieve
their aesthetic effects through the agency of the player.
In Part III, I focus the social and moral consequences of the agential
manipulations of games. In Chapter 8, I argue that games work not only in
the medium of agency but also in the medium of sociality. Games arrange so-
cial relationships and create social patterns through their use of the agential
-- 22 of 23 --
Agency as Art 23
medium. And in doing so, they can achieve some very remarkable effects,
such as transforming competition into cooperation.
In Chapter 9, I worry about a distinctive danger of the agential medium.
Games might threaten our autonomy if we do not properly manage the tran-
sition back to non-game life. Games may foster the expectation that values be
clear, simple, and easily stated—that our goals be obvious and measurable.
Games may present a fantasy of moral clarity. And in Chapter 10, I argue that
aesthetic striving play might offer us some protection against the fantasy of
moral clarity.
One last word of warning: my discussion involves a fairly large number of
in-depth case studies of particular games—far more than one might usually
find in a work of academic philosophy, even one in aesthetics. This is due,
in part, to the relative novelty of trying to present a unified account of the
art form across a broad range of games. My account will include computer
games, team sports, solo sports, board games, card games, party games, ta-
bletop role-playing games, and live-action role- playing games. Much of the
recent discussion of games as an art form has focused fairly narrowly on a
very small set of games: computer games, and mostly single-player computer
games, often with a strong narrative component. I wish to broaden the focus.
Unfortunately, there is no established canon of games that I can depend on
the reader to be familiar with. My case for depends on the reader seeing the
extraordinary variety of ways that games make use of the medium of agency.
So, if you’ll bear with me, I think it very important to describe, in loving de-
tail, a fair number of games. And I hope that the reader, if sufficiently inter-
ested, will also seek out and play some of these games. I have played all of the
games I mention and have chosen to discuss those I think are exemplars of
game design, with a few exceptions as noted. My hope is to develop, through
both argument and examples, a compelling picture of games as a very special
type of human artifact and as a unique art form.
-- 23 of 23 --