Materializing Morality: Design Ethics and Technological Mediation
Author(s): Peter-Paul Verbeek
Source:
Science, Technology, & Human Values, Vol. 31, No. 3, Ethics and Engineering
Design (May, 2006), pp. 361-380
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc.
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/29733944
Accessed: 15-11-2016 12:45 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted
digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about
JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms
Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Science,
Technology, & Human Values
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 1 of 21 --
Materializing Morality
Design Ethics and
Technological Mediation
Peter-Paul Verbeek
University of Twente
During the past decade, the "script" concept, indicating how technologies
prescribe human actions, has acquired a central place in STS. Until now, the
concept has mainly functioned in descriptive settings. This article will deploy
it in a normative setting. When technologies coshape human actions, they give
material answers to the ethical question of how to act. This implies that engi?
neers are doing "ethics by other means": they materialize morality. The article
will explore the implications of this insight for engineering ethics. It first
augments the script concept by developing the notion of technological medi?
ation. After this, it investigates how the concept of mediation could be made
fruitful for design ethics. It discusses how the ambition to design behavior
influencing technologies raises moral questions itself and elaborates two
methods for anticipating technological mediation in the design process: per?
forming mediation analyses and using an augmented version of constructive
technology assessment.
Keywords: philosophy of technology; ethics; engineering ethics; technology
assessment; design
Conceptualizing the Moral Dimension of Technologies
The ethics of engineering design aims to analyze the moral aspects of
technology design in a systematic way. One of the things that should be
taken into account in such analyses is the social impact that the technology
in design will have as soon as it enters society. As recent research in science
and technology studies and the philosophy of technology has shown, tech?
nologies profoundly influence the behavior and experiences of users. This
charges the ethics of engineering design with the task to conceptualize this
influence and to anticipate it in design.
A commonsense vision of the role of technologies in society is guided
by the concept of functionality. Technologies are designed to function.
361
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 2 of 21 --
362 Science, Technology, & Human Values
They should solve a problem or fill a need. In this view, the criteria by
which technologies are to be assessed primarily concern their ability to
realize the ends to which they were designed. From this perspective, the
focus of engineering ethics can concern only the normative aspects of the
goals for which technologies are designed or the quality of the way in
which the technologies function (risk assessment).
The script concept, as developed about a decade ago by Madeleine
Akrich (1992) and Bruno Latour (1992), challenges this strictly functional
vision of technology. Akrich and Latour introduced this concept to describe
the manifold roles technological artifacts play in their use contexts. Like
a theater play or a movie, they hold, technologies possess a "script" in the sense
that they can prescribe the actions of the actors involved. Technologies are
able to evoke certain kinds of behavior: a speed bump can invite drivers to
drive slowly because of its ability to damage a car's shock absorbers, a car
can demand from a driver that he or she wear the safety belt by refusing to
start if the belt is not used, and a plastic coffee cup has the script "throw me
away after use," whereas a porcelain cup "asks" to be cleaned and used again.
Technological artifacts can influence human behavior, and this influence
can be understood in terms of scripts.
Scripts, according to Akrich (1992) and Latour (1992), are the products
of "inscriptions" by designers. Designers anticipate how users will interact
with the product they are designing and, implicitly or explicitly, build pre?
scriptions for use into the materiality of the product. Latour describes this
inscription process in terms of "delegation": designers delegate specific
responsibilities to artifacts, such as the responsibility to make sure nobody
drives too fast, which is delegated to a speed bump.
Conceptualizing technological artifacts in terms of scripts shows that
functionality is too limited a concept for engineering ethics. Scripts tran?
scend functionality: they form a surplus to it, which occurs once the tech?
nology is functioning. When technologies fulfill their functions, they also
help to shape the actions of their users. For this reason, the script concept
lays bare ethical questions regarding technology design that transcend the
commonsense idea that technologies need to be morally evaluated only in
terms of the goals for which they are designed or of the quality of their
functioning. The script approach opens up a new way to morally assess
technologies with respect to the role they play in their use contexts. In
doing so, it also reveals a specific responsibility of the designer, who can be
seen as the inscriber of scripts.
Until now, the script concept has mainly functioned in descriptive set?
tings: in analyses of the role of technologies in their use contexts. In this
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 3 of 21 --
Verbeek / Materializing Morality 363
article, I investigate how the concept can be deployed in a normative
setting. To cover all relevant aspects of the role of technological artifacts in
their use contexts and to provide a vocabulary for describing these aspects,
I will first develop the notion of technological mediation and show that
scripts can be seen as a specific aspect of mediation. After this, I will inves?
tigate how the concept of mediation can be made fruitful for design ethics.
The concept provides designers with an explicit link with the use context in
which their products will be functioning, making it possible to identify and
answer new normative questions during the design process.
Integrating mediation in engineering ethics is a complex task, however.
First, the ambition to design technologies with the explicit aim to influence
human actions raises moral questions itself. It is not self-evident, after all, that
all attempts to steer human behavior are morally justified, and steering human
beings with the help of technology raises associations with the totalitarian
technocracy of Orwell's Big Brother. Second, if some forms of behavior
steering technologies can be seen as morally acceptable?and I think such
technologies do exist?it is very complicated to design them since there is no
linear connection between the activities of designers and the mediating role
of the artifacts they are designing. As I will make clear, this mediating role
also depends on the unpredictable ways in which the technologies are used.
For this reason, I will suggest two ways to cope with this unpredictability.
Technological Mediation1
For analyzing the role of technologies in the daily lives of human beings,
the concept of technological mediation is a helpful tool, especially in the
way it was developed in postphenomenological philosophy of technology
(cf. Verbeek 2005). Phenomenology?in my elementary definition?is the
philosophical analysis of the structure of the relations between humans and
their life-world. From such a phenomenological perspective, the influence
of technology on human behavior can be analyzed systematically, in terms
of the role technology plays in human-world relations. Technological medi?
ation then concerns the role of technology in human action (conceived as
the ways in which human beings are present in their world) and human
experience (conceived as the ways in which their world is present to them).
Human-Technology Relationships
A good starting point for understanding technological mediation is
Martin Heidegger's (1927) classical analysis of the role of tools in the
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 4 of 21 --
364 Science, Technology, & Human Values
everyday relation between humans and their world. According to Heidegger,
tools should be understood as connections or linkages between humans and
reality. Heidegger indicated the way in which tools are present to human
beings when they are used as "readiness-to-hand." Tools that are used for
doing something typically withdraw from people's attention; the attention
of, for example, a person who drives a nail into a wall is not directed at the
hammer but at the nail. A person's involvement with reality takes place
through the ready-to-hand artifact. Only when it breaks down does it ask
attention for itself again. The artifact is then, in Heidegger's words, "present
at-hand" and is not able to facilitate a relationship between a user and his
or her world anymore.
Although ready-to-hand artifacts withdraw from people's attention, they
do play a constitutive role in the human-world relation that arises around
them. When a technological artifact is used, it facilitates people's involve?
ment with reality, and in doing so, it coshapes how humans can be present
in their world and their world for them. In this sense, things-in-use can be
understood as mediators of human-world relationships. Technological arti?
facts are not neutral intermediaries but actively coshape people's being in
the world: their perceptions and actions, experience, and existence.
The positions of the North American philosopher Don Ihde and the
French philosopher and anthropologist Bruno Latour offer concepts for
building a vocabulary to gain a closer understanding of this mediating role
of technologies. To build this vocabulary, I discern two perspectives of
mediation: one that focuses on perception and another one on praxis. Each
of these perspectives approaches the human-world relationship from a dif?
ferent side. The hermeneutic or experience-oriented perspective starts from
the side of world and directs itself at the ways reality can be interpreted and
present for people. The main category here is perception. The pragmatic or
praxis-oriented perspective approached human-world relations from the
human side. Its central question is how human beings act in their world and
shape their existence. The main category here is action.
Mediation of Perception
The central hermeneutic question for a philosophy of mediation is how
artifacts mediate human experiences and interpretations of reality. Don
Ihde's (1990) philosophy of technology is a good starting point for answer?
ing this question because of its focus on the technological mediation of per?
ception. Ihde elaborated Heidegger's tool analysis into an analysis of the
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 5 of 21 --
Verbeek / Materializing Morality 365
relationships between humans and technological artifacts. He discerned
several relationships human beings can have with technologies. Two of
these can be indicated as relations of mediation.2
First, Ihde discerns the embodiment relation, which is his equivalent
to Heidegger's readiness-to-hand. In the embodiment relation, technolo?
gies are incorporated by their users, establishing a relationship between
humans and their world through the technological artifact. This embodi?
ment relation, for instance, occurs when looking through a pair of glasses;
the artifact is not perceived itself, but it helps to perceive the environment.
Technological artifacts become extensions of the human body here, as it
were. Second, Ihde discerns the hermeneutic relation. In this relation, tech?
nologies do not provide access to reality because they are incorporated but
because they provide a representation of reality, which requires interpreta?
tion (hence the name "hermeneutic relation"). A thermometer, for instance,
establishes a relationship between humans and reality in terms of temper?
ature. Reading off a thermometer does not result in a direct sensation of
heat or cold but gives a value that requires interpretation to tell something
about reality.
Ihde shows that technologies, when mediating our sensory relationship
with reality, transform what we perceive. According to Ihde, the transfor?
mation of perception always has a structure of amplification and reduction.
Mediating technologies amplify specific aspects of reality while reducing
other aspects. When looking at a tree with an infrared camera, for instance,
most aspects of the tree that are visible to the naked eye get lost, but at the
same time, a new aspect of the tree becomes visible: one can now see
whether it is healthy. Ihde calls this transforming capacity of technology
"technological intentionality": technologies have "intentions," they are not
neutral instruments but play an active role in the relationship between
humans and their world.
These intentionalities are not fixed properties of artifacts, however. They
get shape within the relationship humans have with these artifacts. Within
different relationships, technologies can have a different identity. The tele?
phone and the typewriter, for instance, were not developed as communica?
tion and writing technologies but as equipment for the blind and the hard of
hearing to help those individuals hear and write. In their use contexts, they
were interpreted quite differently, however. This phenomenon is what Ihde
calls "multistability": a technology can have several stabilities, depending
on the way it is embedded in a use context. Technological intentionalities,
therefore, are always dependent on the specific stabilities that come about.
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 6 of 21 --
366 Science, Technology, & Human Values
Ihde's analysis of the transformation of perception has important
hermeneutic implications. In fact, it shows that mediating artifacts help
to determine how reality can be present for and interpreted by people.
Technologies help to shape what counts as "real." This hermeneutic role of
things has important ethical consequences since it implies that technologies
can actively contribute to the moral decisions human beings make. Medical
imaging technologies, such as magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasound,
are good examples of this. Such technologies make visible parts of the
human body, or of a living fetus in the womb, that cannot be seen without
them. But the specific way in which these technologies represent what they
"see" helps to shape how the body or a fetus is perceived and interpreted
and what decisions are made. In this way, technologies fundamentally
shape people's experience of disease, pregnancy, or their unborn children.
Ultrasound, for instance, makes it quite easy to determine the thickness of
the nape of the neck of a fetus, which gives an indication of the risk that the
unborn child will suffer from Down's syndrome. The very fact of having an
ultrasound scan made, therefore, lets the fetus be present in terms of health
and disease and in terms of our ability to prevent children with this disease
from being born (cf. Verbeek 2002).
Mediation of Action
Within the praxis perspective, the central question is how artifacts medi?
ate people's actions and the way they live their lives. While perception,
from a phenomenological point of view, consists in the way the world is
present for humans, praxis can be seen as the way humans are present in
their world. The work of Bruno Latour offers many interesting concepts for
analyzing how artifacts mediate action (cf. Latour 1992, 1994). Latour
pointed out that what humans do is in many cases coshaped by the things
they use. Actions are the result not only of individual intentions and the
social structures in which human beings find themselves (the classical
agency-structure dichotomy) but also of people's material environment.
The concept introduced by Latour and Akrich to describe the influence of
artifacts on human actions is "script." Like the script of a movie or a theater
play, artifacts prescribe their users how to act when they use them. A speed
bump, for instance, has the script "slow down when you approach me" and
a plastic coffee cup "throw me away after use."
This influence of artifacts on human actions is of a specific nature. When
scripts are at work, things mediate action as material things, not as immaterial
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 7 of 21 --
Verbeek / Materializing Morality 367
signs. A traffic sign makes people slow down because of what it signifies,
not because of its material presence in the relation between humans and
world. And we do not discard a plastic coffee cup because its user's manual
tells us to do so but because it simply is physically not able to survive being
cleaned several times. The influence of technological artifacts on human
actions can be of a nonlingual kind. Things are able to exert influence as
material things, not only as signs or carriers of meaning.
As is the case with perception, in the mediation of action, transforma?
tions occur. Following Latour, within the domain of action, these transfor?
mations can be indicated as "translations" of "programs of action." Latour
attributed programs of actions to all entities, human and nonhuman. When
an entity enters a relationship with another entity, the original programs
of action of both are translated into a new one. When somebody's action
program is to "prepare meals quickly," and this program is added to that
of a microwave oven ("heating food quickly"), the action program of
the resulting, composite actor might be "regularly eating instant meals
individually."
In the translation of action, a similar structure can be discerned as in
the transformation of perception. Just as in the mediation of perception,
some aspects of reality are amplified and others are reduced, in the media?
tion of action, one could say that specific actions are invited while others are
inhibited. The scripts of artifacts suggest specific actions and discourage
others.
The nature of this invitation-inhibition structure is as context dependent
as the amplification-reduction structure of perception. Ihde's concept of
multistability also applies within the context of the mediation of action. The
telephone has had a major influence on the separation of people's geo?
graphical and social context, by making it possible to maintain social rela?
tionships outside our immediate living environment. But it could have this
influence only because it is used as a communication technology, not as the
hearing aid it was originally supposed to be.
An important difference with respect to the mediation of perception,
however, is the way in which action-mediating artifacts are present.
Artifacts mediate action not only from a ready-to-hand position but also
from a present-at-hand position. A gun, to mention an unpleasant example,
mediates action from a ready-to-hand position, translating "express my
anger" or "take revenge" into "kill that person." A speed bump, however,
cannot be embodied. It will never be ready-to-hand; it exerts influence on
people's actions from a present-at-hand position.
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 8 of 21 --
368 Science, Technology, & Human Values
Table 1
A Vocabulary for Technological Mediation
Experience Praxis
Mediation of perception Mediation of action
Technological intentionality Script
Transformation of perception Translation of action
Amplification and reduction Invitation and inhibition
Delegation: deliberate inscription of scripts and intentionalities
Multistability: context dependency of scripts and intentionalities
Vocabulary
The STS concept of scripts, indicating the influence of technological
artifacts on human actions, can be seen as part of a more encompassing
framework for understanding the role of technologies in the relation
between humans and reality. The main concepts of this framework together
form a vocabulary for technological mediation (see Table 1), which could
be helpful to analyze the role of technologies in their use contexts. Artifacts
mediate perception by means of technological intentionalities: the active
and intentional influence of technologies. They mediate action by means of
scripts, which prescribe how to act when using the artifact. This latter form
of mediation is most important for the ethics of engineering design since it
concerns human actions whereas ethics is about the moral question of how
to act. Technological mediation appears to be context dependent and always
entails a translation of action and a transformation of perception. The trans?
lation of action has a structure of invitation and inhibition, the transforma?
tion of perception a structure of amplification and reduction.
Mediation and Engineering Ethics
The phenomenon of technological mediation creates a specific responsi?
bility for designers. The brief overview of technical mediation in the previ?
ous section in fact shows that engineering design is an inherently moral
activity. The fact that technologies-in-use inevitably play a constitutive
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 9 of 21 --
Verbeek / Materializing Morality 369
role in the actions of their users places mediation at the heart of ethics.
Ethics, after all, is about the question of how to act, and technologies appear
to give material answers to this question. Ethical questions regarding the
design of technologies are thus not limited to questions about the goals
for which technologies are designed and applied or to the quality of their
functioning.
When technologies are inherently moral entities, this implies that designers
are doing "ethics by other means": they materialize morality. Usually, this
"doing ethics" happens in an implicit way. Engineers design a new tech?
nology with specific functionalities in mind, without explicitly aiming to
influence the actions and behavior of users. The question, therefore, is how
considerations regarding the mediating role that the technology-in-design
will eventually play in society could be integrated in the design process.
There are two possible ways to take technological mediation into account
during the design process. A first, minimal option is that designers try to assess
whether the product they are designing will have undesirable mediating capac?
ities. A second possibility goes much further: designers could also explicitly
try to build in specific forms of mediation, which are considered desirable.
Morality then, in a sense, becomes part of the functionality of the product.
Moralizing Technologies
The latter direction was taken by the Dutch philosopher Hans Achterhuis
(1995, 1998), who translated Latour's analysis of scripts into a plea for an
explicit "moralization of technology." Instead of moralizing only other people
("do not shower too long," "buy a ticket before you enter the subway"),
humans should also moralize their material environment. To a water-saving
showerhead, the task could be delegated to see to it that not too much water
is used when showering, and to a turnstile, the task to make sure that only
people with a ticket can enter the train.
Achterhuis's plea for a moralization of technology received severe criti?
cism (cf. Achterhuis 1998, 28-31). In the debate that arose around this issue
in the Netherlands, two types of arguments were brought in against his
ideas. First, human freedom was thought to be attacked when human
actions are explicitly and consciously steered with the help of technology.
This reduction of human freedom was even perceived as a threat to human
dignity; if human actions are not a result of deliberate decisions but of
steering technologies, then people were thought to be deprived of what
makes them human. Moreover, if they are not acting in freedom, their
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 10 of 21 --
370 Science, Technology, & Human Values
actions cannot be called moral. Human beings then simply show a type of
behavior that was desired by the designers of the technology, rather than
explicitly choosing to act this way. Second, Achterhuis was accused of jet?
tisoning the democratic principles of our society because his plea for devel?
oping behavior-steering technology was considered an implicit propagation
of technocracy. When moral issues are solved by the technological activi?
ties of designers instead of democratic activities of politicians, these critics
hold, not humans but technology will be in control.
These arguments can be countered, though. Anticipating the mediating
role of technologies during the design process?either to assess possible
undesired forms of mediation or to explicitly moralize technologies?does
not need to be as immoral as it might seem to be. First, human dignity is
not necessarily attacked when limitations of freedom occur. Our legal con?
stitution implies a major limitation of freedom, after all, but this does not
make it a threat to our dignity. Human behavior is determined in many
ways, and human freedom is limited in many ways. Few people will protest
against the legal prohibition of murder, so why protest to the material inhi?
bition imposed by a speed bump to drive too fast at places where children
are often playing on the pavement?
Second, the analysis of technological mediation above shows that
technologies always help to shape human actions. Seen from this perspec?
tive, paying explicit attention to the mediating role of technologies should
be seen as taking the responsibility that the analysis of technological medi?
ation implies. When technologies are always influencing human actions,
we had better try to give this influence a desirable form. Besides, as will
become clear below in the example of a Dutch industrial design initiative,
the moralizing role of technologies does not necessarily have the form of
exerting force on human beings to act in specific ways. Technologies can
also seduce people to do certain things; they can invite specific actions
without forcefully exacting them.
These counterarguments, however, do not take away the anxiety that a
technocracy would come about when technologies are explicitly moralized.
It might be true that technologies do not differ from laws in limiting human
freedom, but laws come about in a democratic way, and the moralization of
technology does not. Yet this does not justify the conclusion that it is better
to refrain from paying explicit attention to technological mediation during
the design process. If technologies are not moralized explicitly, after all, the
responsibility for technological mediation is left to the designers only.
Precisely, this would amount to a form of technocracy. A better conclusion
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 11 of 21 --
Verbeek / Materializing Morality 371
would be that it is important to find a democratic way to moralize technology.
In the following, I will elaborate a way to do this.
Designing Mediations
The moral impediments to the moralization of technology can be
countered much more easily than the practical impediments. The moraliza?
tion of technological artifacts is not as easy as it might seem to be. To build
in specific forms of mediation in technologies, designers need to anticipate
the future mediating role of the technologies they are designing. And this is
a complex task since there is no direct relationship between the activities of
designers and the mediating role of the technologies they are designing. As
became clear above, the mediating role of technologies comes about in a
complex interplay between technologies and their users.
Technologies are multistable, as Ihde calls it. They have no fixed iden?
tity but get defined only in their context of use. Technologies have to be
interpreted and appropriated by their users to be more than just objects
lying around. Only when human beings use them, artifacts become artifacts
for doing something. And this "for doing something" is determined not
entirely by the properties of the artifact itself but also by the ways users deal
with them, as became clear in the example of the telephone that was origi?
nally designed as a hearing aid. If this were not the case, accepting the idea
of technological mediation would take us back to technological determin?
ism; technologies would then be able to determine the behavior of their
users all by themselves instead of being part of a sociotechnical network.
This multistability of technologies makes it very difficult to predict the
ways in which technologies will influence human actions and accordingly
to evaluate this influence in ethical terms. Technologies can be used in
unforeseen ways and therefore have an unforeseen influence on human
actions. Besides this, unforeseen forms of mediation can also emerge when
technologies are indeed used as the designer intended. Revolving doors, for
example, were designed to make it possible to enter a building while keep?
ing the draught outside. Once they were used, they also appeared to inhibit
people in a wheelchair to enter a building.
Designers thus help to shape the mediating roles of technologies, but
these roles also depend on the ways in which the technologies are used and
on the ways in which the technologies in question allow unforeseen medi?
ations to emerge. The suggestion that scripts are a result of inscriptions
(Akrich) or delegations (Latour) therefore does not do enough justice to the
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 12 of 21 --
372 Science, Technology, & Human Values
Figure 1
Sources of Mediation
User
(interpretation, "
appropriation)
Designer
(delegation, inscription) '
Technology
(emergence) "
-> Mediation ;
Technological intentionality
(transformation of perception)
Scripts
(translation of action)
complex way in which mediation comes about. Designers cannot simply
inscribe a desired form of morality into an artifact. The mediating role of
technologies is not only the result of the activities of the designers, who
inscribe scripts or delegate responsibilities, but also depends on the users,
who interpret and appropriate technologies, and on the technologies them?
selves, which can evoke emergent forms of mediation. Figure 1 draws
together these factors in the coming about of mediation.
To cope with this complexity, designers should try to establish a con?
nection between the context of design and the context of use. Designers
could try to formulate product specifications not only on the basis of the
desired functionality of the product but also on the basis of an informed
prediction of its future mediating role and a moral assessment of this role.
Such a prediction could be indicated as a mediation analysis: an analysis of
the future role of the technology-in-design in terms of the vocabulary that
was elaborated in the Technological Mediation section.
Mediation analyses could be carried out in two different ways. The first
is simply prediction by the imagination of the designer. Imagination can
create a link between the designer and the technology in its future use
context. When designers attempt to imagine what mediating role the tech?
nology they are designing might play in the behavior of its users, they could
feed these anticipations back into the design process. As an example of
this approach, I will briefly discuss the work done by the Dutch indus?
trial designers collective Eternally Yours. A second way to formulate
an informed prediction of the future mediating role of technologies is
a more systematic one. It consists in an augmentation of the existing design
methodology of constructive technology assessment in such a way that
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 13 of 21 --
Verbeek / Materializing Morality 373
it becomes an instrument for a democratically organized moralization of
technology.
Anticipation by Imagination: Eternally Yours
An interesting example of anticipating mediation by imagination is the
work of the Dutch industrial designers collective Eternally Yours. Eternally
Yours is engaged in ecodesign but in an unorthodox way (cf. van Hinte
1997; Verbeek 2005). It does not want to address the issue of sustainability
in only the usual terms of reducing pollution in production, consumption,
and waste. The actual problem, Eternally Yours holds, is that most of our
products are thrown away far before actually being worn out. Meeting this
problem could be much more effective than reducing pollution in the dif?
ferent stages of products' life cycles. For this reason, Eternally Yours
focuses on developing ways to create product longevity. It does so by inves?
tigating how the coming about of attachment between products and their
users could be stimulated and enhanced.
To stimulate longevity, Eternally Yours seeks to design things that invite
people to use and cherish them as long as possible. "It is time for a new
generation of products, that can age slowly and in a dignified way, that can
become our partners in life and support our memories," as Eternally Yours
approvingly quoted the Italian designer Ezio Manzini in its letterhead.
Eternally Yours investigates what characteristics of products are able to
evoke a bond with their users. According to Eternally Yours, three dimen?
sions can be discerned in the life span of products. Things have a technical,
an economical, and a psychological life span. Products can turn into waste
because they simply are broken and cannot be repaired anymore, because
they are outdated by newer models that have appeared in the market, and
because they no longer fit people's preferences and taste. For Eternally
Yours, the psychological life span is the most important. The crucial ques?
tion for sustainable design is therefore, How can the psychological lifetime
of products be prolonged?
Eternally Yours developed many ideas to answer this question. For
instance, it searched for forms and materials that could stimulate longevity.
Materials were investigated that do not get unattractive when aging but
have "quality of wear." Leather, for instance, is mostly found more beauti?
ful when it has been used for some time, whereas a shiny polished
chromium surface looks worn out with the first scratch. An interesting
example of a design in this context is the upholstery of a couch that was
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 14 of 21 --
374 Science, Technology, & Human Values
designed by Sigrid Smits. In the velour that was used for it, a pattern was
stitched that is initially invisible. When the couch has been used for a while,
the pattern gradually becomes visible. Instead of aging in an unattractive
way, this couch renews itself when getting old. Eternally Yours not only
pays attention to materials and product surfaces, however. It also investi?
gated the ways in which services around products can influence their life
span. The availability of repair and upgrading services can prevent people
from discarding products prematurely.
The most important way to stimulate longevity that should be mentioned
in the context of this article, however, consists in designing products that
evoke a bond with their users by engaging users in their functioning. Most
technologies ask as little attention for themselves as possible when people
are using them. Technologies, after all, are often designed to disburden
people: a central heating system liberates us from the necessity to gather
wood, chop it, fill the hearth, clean it, and so forth. We need only to switch
a button and our house gets warm. But this disburdening character also cre?
ates a loss of engagement with technological products. Ever fewer interac?
tions are needed to use them (cf. Borgmann 1992). One of the downsides
of this development is that this also affects the attachment between human
beings and technological products. The product as a material entity has
become less important than the function it fulfills. In many cases, human
beings are not invited to interact with the technological artifact they are
using but only to consume the commodity it procures.
The work of Eternally Yours shows that this loss of engagement can be
countered in a playful way. Technological products could invite users to
interact with them without being so demanding that nobody would be pre?
pared to use them. An interesting example in this direction is an engaging
electric/ceramic heater that was designed by Sven Adolph. It consists of a
heating element with several concentric, cylindrically shaped ceramic
shells of different height around it, which all have a vertical aperture. The
shells can be arranged in several ways, so that they radiate their warmth in
specific directions. This artifact is not a purely functional heater that with?
draws into pure functionality like common radiators, which are hidden
under the windowsill and are only turned on and off. It is an engaging prod?
uct that asks for attention and involvement in its functioning, much like a
campfire. You cannot hide it under the windowsill but have to put it in the
middle of the room. You cannot escape it if you need warmth: you have to
sit around it. Its shells have to be arranged if you want it to function. Simply
turning the heater on and off is not enough: you actually have to be involved
in its functioning if you want it to work.
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 15 of 21 --
Verbeek / Materializing Morality 375
The activities of Eternally Yours can be seen as a form of anticipating
mediation by imagination. Sigrid Smits's couch and Sven Adolph's heater
were designed explicitly from the perspective of their possible mediating
role in the interactions and affective relationships their owners will have
with them. They mediate the behavior of their users in such a way that the
users are likely to get attached more to these artifacts than to other couches
or heaters. These products were designed not only as functional objects
but also as artifacts that actively mediate the behavior of their users. The
products of Eternally Yours embody an environmental ethics: they seduce
their users to cherish them rather than throwing them away prematurely.
Augmenting Constructive Technology Assessment
A second way to make an informed prediction about the mediating role of
a technology-in-design is a more systematic one. To establish a connection
between the context of use and the context of design, designers could also
employ a method that was developed precisely for making such a connection:
the method of constructive technology assessment (CTA; cf. Schot 1992; Rip,
Misa, and Schot 1995). CTA creates a link between the contexts of design
and use in a practical way: it aims to involve all relevant stakeholders in the
design of technologies. To make use of the CTA methodology within the con?
text of technological mediation, it needs to be augmented, though.
CTA is based on an evolutionary view of technology development. The
process of technology development is seen as generating variations that are
exposed to a selection environment, which is formed by entities such as
the market and government regulations. In this selection environment, only the
fittest variations will survive. There is an important difference between the
generation of technologies and the generation of biological species, though.
Contrary to biological evolution, in technology development, there is a con?
nection or nexus between variation and selection. After all, designers can
anticipate the selection environment when they are designing technologies,
to prevent that much effort is put into developing technologies that will not
be accepted by consumers or by government regulations.
CTA is a method to employ this nexus in a systematic way, by feeding
back assessments of the technology-in-design by all relevant actors, such as
users, pressure groups, designers, companies, and so forth, into the design
process. It does so by organizing meetings of all relevant actors in which
the aim is to reach consensus about the design of the technology that is con?
structively assessed. This form of technology assessment is called "con?
structive" because it does not assess technologies after they have been
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 16 of 21 --
376 Science, Technology, & Human Values
developed but during their development, so that these assessments can be
used to modify the original design. Besides this, CTA can be seen as a
democratization of the designing process. When a CTA design methodology
is followed, not only designers determine what a technology will look like
but all relevant social actors. Following this method, therefore, could take
away the fear for technocracy that was discussed above.
Seen from the perspective of technological mediation, however, CTA
also has limitations that need to be overcome. CTA primarily focuses on
human actors and pays too little attention to the actively mediating role of
the nonhuman actor that is at the center of all activity: the technology-in
design. CTA claims to open the black box of technology by analyzing the
complex dynamics of technology development. It bases itself on the con
structivist notion that technologies are not given but rather the outcome of
a process in which many actors are involved. Other interactions between the
actors might have resulted in a different technology. But by analyzing the
dynamics of technology development, the black box of technology is
opened only half way. It reveals how technologies emerge from their design
context, but their role in their use context remains black boxed. Therefore,
organizing a democratic, domination-free discussion between all relevant
actors is not enough to lay bare all relevant aspects of the technology in
question. The mediating role of the technology-in-design is likely to remain
hidden during the entire CTA process if it is not put explicitly and system?
atically on the agenda.
For this reason, participants in the CTA process should be invited not
only to integrate assessments of users and pressure groups in product spec?
ifications but also to anticipate possible mediating roles of the technology
in-design. The vocabulary for analyzing mediation, as presented in the
Technological Mediation section of this article, could be helpful for doing
this. As Figure 2 illustrates, approaching the artifact-in-design in terms of
mediation offers a perspective that can be used when creating a nexus
between the contexts of design and use.
When the CTA method is augmented in this way, the method of antici?
pation by imagination is given a more systematic character. Creating space
for all relevant stakeholders to anticipate the possible mediating role of the
technology-in-design enhances the chance that as many mediating roles as
possible are taken into account. To be sure, this augmentation of the CTA
methodology does not guarantee that all mediating roles of the technology
in-design will be predicted. It creates a connection between the inscriptions
within the context of design and the interpretations or appropriations within
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 17 of 21 --
Verbeek / Materializing Morality 377
Figure 2
Mediation and the Nexus between Design and Use
User
Context of design
Inscription / Delegation
Artifact
Mediation
- emergent
- intended
Environment
Nexus:
anticipation
of mediation
? by imagination
? augmenting CTA
-? Context
of use
Interpretation / Appropriation
Mediation:
? technological
intentionality
? scripts
the context of use, but this cannot possibly cover all emergent mediating
roles of the technology. Yet it might be a fruitful way to give shape to
the responsibility of designers that becomes visible from the analysis of
technical mediation.
Conclusion
The analyses of technological mediation, which have been elaborated
over the past years in STS and philosophy of technology, have major impli?
cations for the ethics of engineering design. The insight that technologies
inevitably play a mediating role in the actions of users makes the work of
designers an inherently moral activity. Ethics is about the question of how
to act, and technologies appear to be able to give material answers to this
question by inviting or even exacting specific forms of action when they are
used. This implies that technological mediation could play an important
role in the ethics of engineering design. Designers should focus not only on
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 18 of 21 --
378 Science, Technology, & Human Values
the functionality of technologies but also on their mediating roles. The fact
that technologies always mediate human actions charges designers with the
responsibility to anticipate these mediating roles.
This anticipation is a complex task, however, since the mediating role of
technologies is not entirely predictable. But even though the future cannot
be predicted with full accuracy, ways do exist to develop well-informed and
rationally grounded conjectures. To cope with the uncertainty regarding the
future role of technologies in their use contexts, designers should try to
bridge the gap between the context of use and the context of design.
One way to do so is by carrying out a mediation analysis with the help
of the designer's imagination, which can be facilitated by the vocabulary
developed in this article. Such an analysis will not allow designers to pre?
dict entirely how the technology they are designing will actually be used,
but it will help to identify possible use practices and the forms of mediation
that might emerge alongside it.
Designers could also make use of an augmented form of constructive
technology assessment, in which the connection between design and use is
made not only in imagination but also in practice. In this case, a mediation
analysis is carried out not by the designer individually but by all stake?
holders together, who engage in a democratically organized debate to
decide how to feed back the outcomes of this analysis into the design
process. Following this method could take away part of the fear that delib?
erately designing behavior-steering technology would lead to technocracy
since the inevitable mediating role of technology is made subject to demo?
cratic decision making here.
To be sure, this anticipation of technological mediation introduces new
complexities in the design process. Designers, for instance, might have to
deal with trade-offs: in some cases, designing a product with specific desir?
able mediating characteristics might have negative consequences for the
usefulness or attractiveness of the product. Introducing automatic speed
influencing in cars will make sure that drivers keep to the speed limit but at
the cost of the experience of freedom, which appears to be rather important
to some car drivers, judging by the fierce societal resistance against speed
limiting measures. Also, when anticipating the mediating role of technolo?
gies, prototypes might be developed and rejected because they are likely to
bring about undesirable mediations. Dealing with such trade-offs and unde?
sirable spin-offs requires a separate moral decision-making process.
Technology design appears to entail more than inventing functional prod?
ucts. The perspective of technological mediation, which has been developed
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 19 of 21 --
Verbeek / Materializing Morality 379
in STS and in the philosophy of technology, reveals that designing should
be regarded as a form of materializing morality. This implies that the ethics
of engineering design should take more seriously the moral charge of
technological products and rethink the moral responsibility of designers
accordingly.
Notes
1. The text of this section is a reworked version of a section in P. P. Verbeek (forthcoming).
It can be seen as a summary of the analysis of technological mediation as developed in
Verbeek (2005).
2. Ihde (1990) also distinguished two relations that do not directly concern mediation.
First, he identified the "alterity relation," in which technologies are the terminus of our expe?
rience. This relation, which mirrors Heidegger's "presence at hand," occurs when interacting
with a device as if it were another living being, for instance, when buying a train ticket at an
automatic ticket dispenser. Second, Ihde discerned the "background relation." In this relation,
technologies play a role at the background of our experience, creating a context for it. An
example of this relation is the automatic switching on and off of the refrigerator.
References
Achterhuis, H. 1995. De moralisering van de apparaten. Socialisme en D?mocratie 52 (1): 3-12.
-. 1998. De erfenis van de utopie. Amsterdam: Ambo.
Akrich, M. 1992. The de-scription of technological objects. In Shaping technology/building
society, ed. W. E. Bijker and J. Law, 205-24. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Borgmann, A. 1992. Technology and the character of contemporary life. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Heidegger, M. 1927. Sein und Zeit. T?bingen, Germany: Max Niemeyer Verlag.
Ihde, D. 1990. Technology and the lifeworld. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Latour, B. 1992. Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few mundane artifacts. In
Shaping technology/building society, ed. W. E. Bijker and J. Law, 225-58. Cambridge:
MIT Press
-. 1994. On technical mediation: Philosophy, sociology, genealogy. Common
Knowledge 3:29-64.
Rip, A., T. Misa, and j. Schot, eds. 1995. Managing technology in society: The approach of
constructive technology assessment. London: Pinter.
Schot, J. 1992. Constructive technology assessment and technology dynamics: The case of
clean technologies. Science, Technology, & Human Values 17:36-56.
van Hinte, E. 1997. Eternally Yours: Visions on product endurance. Rotterdam, the
Netherlands: 010 Publishers.
Verbeek, P. P. 2002. Pragmatism and pragmata: Bioethics and the technological mediation of
experience. In Pragmatist ethics for a technological culture, ed. J. Keulartz, M. Schermer,
M. Korthals, and T. Swierstra, 119-23. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer.
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 20 of 21 --
380 Science, Technology, & Human Values
-. 2005. What things do: Philosophical reflections on technology, agency, and design.
University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
-. Forthcoming. Acting artifacts: The technological mediation of action. In User behav?
ior and technology design: Shaping sustainable relations between consumers and tech?
nologies, ed. P. P. Verbeek and A. Slob. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer.
Peter-Paul Verbeek is an assistant professor of philosophy of technology at the University of
Twente, the Netherlands. His current research concerns the morality of technological artifacts
and its implications for ethical theory and design practices. For more information, see
http://www.gw.utwente.nl/wjsb/medewerkers/verbeek.
This content downloaded from 152.14.136.96 on Tue, 15 Nov 2016 12:45:27 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
-- 21 of 21 --