7
Ethics
So far, we have investigated some key aspects of Design, attempting
along the way to assess the various philosophical claims about
Design implicit in Modernist thinking. Although we have covered
aesthetics, expression and function, there is one very broad area
about which we haven’t yet said much: ethics. In this chapter, we
will take up this important topic, but, before we do, a bit of termi-
nological clarification is in order.
In its everyday use, the term “ethics,” and its sister word “moral-
ity,” perhaps suggest a set of more or less explicit rules or norms
which constrain our public behavior. To behave in an ethical manner
is, in this sense, to follow the relevant rules of conduct. In philo-
sophical contexts, however, the term is used a broader way to refer
to a concern with the question of how one should live, or what a
good human life consists in. This broader sense of the term incor-
porates the narrower sense, since rules or norms that constrain how
we should treat others are one important aspect of the way we live.
But it also includes much more, and relates to questions about what
sort of person we should strive to be, which activities are worthwhile
and which are not, and so on.
Design is relevant to ethics in both senses, but particularly in the
broader sense, given that it has a great effect upon how we live
through its creation of our material, and, increasingly, our immate-
rial or virtual, environment. As we have seen, this “mediation” of
our experience through technology occurs not only when Design
makes a new kind of deliberate action possible, but also through the
more subtle ways that Designs shape our unreflective behavior and
thinking (Verbeek 2005).
-- 1 of 23 --
130 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN
There are a number of ways to explore the connections between
Design and ethics; in this chapter, I focus on three.1 The first con-
cerns perhaps the most obvious point of connection: the way that
Designers confront and handle ethical rules, regulations and norms
that apply to the objects they are creating. The second involves
something more fundamental: the Designer’s very choice of what
to create. This second issue takes us into a philosophical investiga-
tion of consumerism and the difference between needs and wants.
The third issue again takes us into a deep philosophical issue:
whether a consideration of the role of Design in how we live implies
a fundamental reconsideration of the very concept of ethics itself.
In the course of our discussion, we will also examine the Modernist’s
claim (or hope) that the pursuit of functional Design will, in some
way, lead us to ethically better Design.
7.1 Applied Ethics and Design
It is beyond dispute that to create certain kinds of products, or to
Design them in certain ways, would be unethical. To Design an
explosive device in bright colors that would appeal to children, for
example, would very clearly be wrong. Such cases of inherently
unethical Design are, thankfully, as rare as they are extreme.2 More
common are cases where the ethical problem is not with the object
per se, but in the fact that Designers have negligently compromised
user safety in some way, usually as a way of cost-cutting. Also famil-
iar are those cases where an ethical problem is connected with some
particular way of using (or misusing) the object: handguns would
be an obvious example. One can argue that it is not the production,
or use, of the object per se that threatens ethical norms, but only
certain misuses of the object. Hence the infamous slogan of the
National Rifle Association, that “Guns don’t kill people, people kill
people.” On the other hand, some insist that the problem is not
merely one of misuse and that the very production and “standard
use” of handguns (as concealed deterrents, for example) is itself
unethical.
These sorts of discussions clearly carry Designers into the terri-
tory of ethics. Before we explore this terrain further, however, it
will be useful to distinguish three traditional sub-divisions of the
field: meta-ethics, normative ethics and applied ethics. Meta-ethics
-- 2 of 23 --
ETHIcS 131
is the branch of philosophy that attempts to understand, in a very
general way, the nature of ethics itself. Questions in this field
include: What is a moral norm? and What is the basis for moral
judgement? (Miller 2003). Normative ethics, while not attempting to
address these very fundamental questions, attempts to spell out the
most general principles or frameworks for ethical decision-making.
One such principle, widely debated in normative ethics, is the Utili-
tarian principle that actions are morally right when they contribute
to human happiness (Mill [1861] 1979). Finally, applied or practical
ethics seeks to understand particular moral problems and determine
whether particular actions (abortion, or euthanasia, for example) are
morally permissible or not. Overlap between ethics and Design
typically falls in the last category: the ethical issue around producing
handguns, for example, is not a meta-ethical one, nor an issue of
normative ethics, concerning a general moral principle or frame-
work, but an issue of the ethical status of a particular action – pro-
ducing handguns.
This sort of issue typically arises when a new type of thing allows
a new sort of action that runs up against socially sanctioned ethical
norms. As the things Designers create, and the actions that those
things make possible, are subject to society’s ethical norms and
rules, this means that Design has an important ethical aspect.
However, this ethical dimension of Designing is sometimes
obscured, in the popular consciousness at least, by the influence of
a particular way of thinking about technology and its development
– the idea of technological determinism. Technological determin-
ism is the idea that the development of technology is not controlled
by human thought and decision-making: rather, it is the other way
around. The development of technology has a “life of its own,” and
once technologies are in place they shape the nature of society and
its decisions. On this view, although humans may debate about the
merits of new technologies, and whether they should be pursued,
this is ultimately beside the point, as whatever can be made, given
current scientific and technical knowledge, eventually will be made.3
However, even if some version of technological determinism is
true, this would not entail that ethical deliberation about technol-
ogy is pointless. Even if technology is in some part driven by “inter-
nal forces,” social values and decisions undoubtedly play a role as
well. Feng offers the example of the development of microproces-
sors, which supposedly follow “Moore’s Law” of doubling in power
-- 3 of 23 --
132 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN
every 18 to 24 months. This development seems to be constrained
only by internal factors to do with technical improvements in pro-
cessing speeds. Yet, Feng observes, the development would not
occur were it not for heavy investment in processing research.
Thus, social values and demands also play a crucial, if not always
highly visible, role (Feng 2000; Neeley and Luegenbiehl 2008).
Furthermore, even if there were a kind of inevitability about what
things will be produced in the future, there are still many ethically
important choices to be made about how those things will be
Designed. Van Gorp and van de Poel (2008, 79–80) offer the simple
example of Designing a photocopier. Does one make the default
setting “one-sided printing” or “two-sided printing?” While the
choice may seem trivial, it could have enormous implications for
paper use and thereby for environmental sustainability.
A second factor serving to obscure the ethical aspect of Designing
is the fact that, although cases of items with some dangerous use
(or misuse), such as handguns, attract much attention, the bulk of
the applied ethics of Design concerns more mundane matters of
safety: it is unethical to Design a device that is unsafe and puts
people at an unacceptable risk. But this ethical area might seem an
unproblematic one from the philosophical point of view, given the
existence of legal product standards for many types of goods. The
Designer may merely consult the relevant product codes and ensure
that his or her Design is safe, without any need for ethical
deliberation.
However, the nature of Design as a creative activity means that,
in some cases at least, things will not be so straightforward, since
there simply will not be extant codes and regulations covering the
new object (Van Gorp and van de Poel 2008). A narrow focus on
safety standards also obscures a major complicating factor in the
applied ethics of Design, which is that safety is far from the only
relevant ethical value. Others include freedom, availability, con-
sumer choice, privacy and environmental sustainability (as in the
above example of the copier button). The applied ethics of Design
can involve all of these values, given that Design has the potential
to affect our ability to realize them.
Nor is applied Design ethics simply a matter of satisfying what-
ever ethical norms society has instituted, or whatever ethical values
it happens to hold. For these different ethical norms and values can,
and often do, conflict with one another as well as with functional
-- 4 of 23 --
ETHIcS 133
criteria for Design. For example, from the point of view of func-
tionality, it seems that Designers should always strive for the
highest-quality goods possible. But as Bakker and Loui (1997)
argue, this might not always result in realizing certain ethical values:
a Design might fulfill its function very effectively, for example, but
do so inefficiently, consuming a great deal of resources and there-
fore compromising environmental sustainability. Also, inefficiency
might make the item more expensive, reducing consumer choice.
The operation of a perfectly functional Design might also, through
its normal operation, compromise user freedom, in the way that
seatbelt-linked ignition systems do. Security systems that are very
effective in detecting potential threats to public safety can compro-
mise privacy, and so on (on value conflicts in engineering design,
see van de Poel 2009). A very large part of the ethics of Design
consists in trying to clarify and resolve these conflicts between dif-
ferent values, in order to determine whether the use of a new item
would be appropriate, or not.
7.2 Consumerism, Needs and Wants
This last point in our discussion of applied ethics in Design has an
important implication for the Modernist’s claim that purely func-
tional Design will be ethically good Design. Clearly this thesis
cannot be maintained, if we consider the ethical values relevant to
Design in the broadest sense. As mentioned, highly functional
Designs can negatively affect freedom, privacy and other ethical
values. However, perhaps the Modernist claim could be understood
in a more modest sense, as the claim that purely functional Design
would be ethically beneficent in one respect, by combating wasteful
consumerism.
The thought here would be that if we eschew the expressionist
and aesthetic employments of Design, and instead pursue purely
functional Design, a great wasting of resources will be avoided.
There is clearly some truth in this, since much consumption is
generated by the use of consumer goods as expressive or aesthetic
aids. A classic example is the automobile, still redesigned year after
year in the hopes of convincing people to replace their existing
vehicles. However, this version of the Modernist’s claim is too
modest, for a Design practice that dispensed with aesthetic and
-- 5 of 23 --
134 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN
expressive aims could still be massively wasteful of resources by
producing functionally excellent designs for pointless devices. Con-
sider, for example, the leaf blower. A well-designed leaf blower
might be very effective at carrying out its function: blowing leaves
around. The problem with devices like this one is not that they are
created for aesthetic or expressive reasons, but that the functions
they fulfill are, in some sense, gratuitous or unnecessary.4 There
is no need to blow leaves around, given that one can rake them
into a pile.
Thus, if Modernism is to vindicate even the more modest version
of its claim, it must distinguish between those functions that are
valid and those that are unnecessary: the most obvious way to do
this would be to appeal to the conceptual distinction between wants
and needs. The Modernist could then claim that functional Design
that addresses needs leads to ethically good Design, at least in the
sense of reducing consumption. In a sense this distinction is already
present in the Modernist view, for the very rejection of expression
is tantamount to the view that expression through Design, while
certainly something that many people want, is not something that
they actually need.
The very distinction between want and need, however, is con-
tested. Indeed, it can be hard to see this distinction sometimes in
everyday language, where the terms “want” and “need” are often used
rather loosely and interchangeably. Writers on Design, for instance,
will sometimes tackle the question “Do you need new Design item
X?” when really the issue they are addressing is: “Given its novel
features, will you want Design item X badly enough to pay what it
costs?” This casual use of the term “need” aside, however, there does
appear to be a distinction, in our linguistic practices, between the
concepts of want and need (Wiggins and Derman 1987). This distinc-
tion shows itself in several ways, firstly in the fact that we often
acknowledge that people want things that they don’t need (a third
pair of red running shoes) and that, conversely, people need things
that they don’t want (education or a medical treatment, for instance).
A second aspect of the distinction between needs and wants,
which helps to explain the first, is that the former are taken to be
more objective than the latter. For someone to want something is
merely for that person to be a certain way: it is for him to have a
certain psychological relation to that thing. For someone to need
something, more is required than that the subject have a certain
-- 6 of 23 --
ETHIcS 135
psychological relation to it; the thing in question must be in some
way “called for” by real features of his life situation (Wiggins and
Derman 1987, 62). This is not to say that desires cannot also be
called for by features of our life situation, for we often want things
we need (food, sleep and so on). But wants needn’t possess this
objective aspect, whereas needs must.
This second difference leads naturally toward a third, which is
that needs have a kind of priority over wants. As one philosopher
puts it, “an assertion that something is needed tends to create an
impression of an altogether different quality, and to have a substan-
tially greater moral impact, than an assertion that something is
desired” (Frankfurt 1984, 1). Thus, if one person desires a new
espresso machine, and another desires sufficient food to keep himself
alive, we naturally give precedence to satisfying the second person,
since he needs the thing in question, whereas the first person does
not need a new espresso machine, but merely wants one. This is so
even if the psychological relation of desire that each has toward the
object is the same (even if the man who wants the espresso machine
wants it more intensely than the other man wants food to stay alive,
perhaps because of pain and despair, he still has nothing like an
equal claim to it). This idea is sometimes referred to as the “Prin-
ciple of Preference” (Frankfurt 1984, 3).
Given that we can draw the distinction between wants and needs,
however, the question arises as to what things fall into the latter
category. In philosophical discussions, attention is often focused on
the so-called “basic needs” of food, air, water and shelter. Everyone
would agree that these are bona fide needs of human beings, and
not merely wants, for these things are “called for by objective fea-
tures of one’s life situation” in a very direct way: without them,
human beings die. However, “things necessary for survival” is a very
narrow conception of need: if mere biological survival is all that is
at stake, then humans do not need espresso machines, but neither
do they need electricity, or even indoor plumbing. As miserable as
forgoing these might make us, we would no doubt survive (as our
forebears did).
More to the point, understanding need in terms of the basic
needs only is far too narrow a conception of need for use in the
Modernist claim, since it would restrict Design to things such as
architecture, agriculture and perhaps medicine. While this would
no doubt solve the ethical problem of over-consumption, it is too
-- 7 of 23 --
136 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN
extreme to merit serious consideration.5 Furthermore, and more
importantly, while many Design objects address aims other than the
basic needs, they are not thereby unnecessary or gratuitous. For
example, neither telephones nor leaf blowers are required for bio-
logical survival but, intuitively, the second is a much clearer example
of “unnecessary design” than the first. Another way to put the point
is that we do use the term “need” to cover more than the basic
needs. We therefore require a more widely applicable criterion for
being a need, as opposed to a mere want.
One natural strategy here would be to understand a need as
something that is not desired merely for its own sake, but is required
to achieve some larger end. As Harry Frankfurt puts the idea:
“when something is needed it must . . . be possible to specify
what it is needed for” (1984, 3). Thus we might say that someone
who buys a car in order to get to work and pursue a career is fulfill-
ing a need, but that someone who buys a convertible, “just to have
it,” is only gratifying a want. In the first case, the object facilitates
the realization of a larger goal, whereas in the second case, it
does not.
This line of thought is appealing, since it is true that we often
broach the question of whether we need something in this fashion,
by looking for a larger end to be realized. However, a little reflec-
tion shows the futility of this approach, since for almost anything
at all one can easily find a “larger aim” for which that thing is
essential. Thus the man buying his third convertible can easily
rationalize his purchase by saying that it is necessary for him to
complete his convertible collection, which it well may be. Generally
speaking, it seems that any want can be cast in the form of a need,
using this criterion.
The failure of this attempt to find a broader conception of “need”
might tempt us to skepticism about the very possibility of doing so.
A skeptic might argue as follows: perhaps the concept of “need,” if
extended any further than the so-called “basic needs,” is an empty
one. People want various things, to a greater or a lesser degree, but
nothing that they desire or might desire is really “called for by their
life situation” in the objective way that a true (i.e. basic) need is.
The skeptic could also add a somewhat cynical explanation for why
we insist on using this broader concept of need, in spite of its empti-
ness. Here the skeptic may say that, aside from the basic needs, the
“needs” we speak of are false needs: nothing more than intense
-- 8 of 23 --
ETHIcS 137
desires dressed up in “objective” garb. If this was right, then the
concept of need, as it might be deployed in Design, would be an
insidious one: when a man says that he needs a new suit, what he
really means is just that he really wants one, although he prefers
not to come out and simply say this, as doing so would make him
feel less justified in acting to satisfy this desire.
7.3 Is Need an Empty Concept?
The skeptical view of needs as no more than intense desires, which
was sketched in the previous section, is important to consider. If it
is true, then it seems to throw into doubt the thesis that we can
reduce consumption by Designing for needs. One problem for this
skeptical view has already been noted – the fact that we sometimes
want to say that a person needs something even though she doesn’t
want it at all (“She needs to change her attitude”; “He needs to
learn some manners”). These needs, at least, cannot be reduced to
desires. However, as we have already seen, wants, like needs, can be
construed as necessary for the attainment of some higher end that
is desired. Thus perhaps the skeptic can say that, in the above cases,
a need is something that, given her desires, the person in question
would want, if she understood her situation rationally.
What then should we make of this skeptical view? The opponent
of the skeptic will want to insist that there does seem to be a
genuine difference between someone’s (false) need for a third con-
vertible and her true need for, say, education, or social skills. The
problem is to explain how we can make sense of this apparent
difference.
In broaching the distinction between true and false needs, writers
on Design and consumerism have sometimes appealed to the origin
of needs as the crucial factor. Victor Papanek, for instance, writes
that “the economic, spiritual, technological, and intellectual needs
of a human being are usually more difficult and less profitable to
satisfy than the carefully engineered and manipulated ‘wants’ incul-
cated by fad and fashion” (1971, 11).6 Might we not say that false
needs are needs that we would fail to recognize, were it not for the
influence of some external force, such as advertising? This is an
appealing view, given the great power of advertising to instil
wants and desires, as well as the number of intuitively false needs
-- 9 of 23 --
138 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN
associated with advertising. It is easy to think of examples of clever
advertising campaigns that lead people to believe that they need the
latest product. However, it would be a mistake to understand false
needs as those with a particular origin (that is, as those we come to
recognize only through some outside influence). A person with a
medical condition, or an ignorant person, might never come to
recognize that they need medical treatment or education without
being influenced by some outside agency. This influence might
involve a significant amount of persuasion, just as advertising does.
But this would not make their needs any less real.
To distinguish true from false needs, we need to look not to the
origin of the associated desire, but to the value of that which is
desired. An approach of this kind was taken by the ancient Greek
philosopher Aristotle, who defines a need as a thing
without which . . . it is not possible to live, as for instance breathing
and nourishment are necessary for an animal, because it is incapable
of existing without them: and anything without which it is not pos-
sible for good to exist or come to be, or for bad to be discarded or
got rid of, as for instance, drinking medicine is necessary so as not
to be ill, and sailing to Aegina so as to get money. (1015a20)
In the first part of this quotation, Aristotle gives examples of what
we have been calling “basic needs,” such as air, food and medical
treatment. But the second criteria that he gives for a need – being
necessary “for good to exist or come to be” – is general enough to
illuminate needs beyond the basic ones.
The core of Aristotle’s account is that needs are those things
required for us to achieve things of value (things that are good, or
worthwhile). Returning to our earlier example, both the person who
needs education and the person who needs a third convertible are
trying to achieve some higher aim, and both may have been influenced
by some external force, but only the former seeks something necessary
to achieve something of value. The person who wants the third con-
vertible cannot say that, without it, “good will fail to come to exist,”
since there is little value or worth in a collection of red convertibles.
Of course, such a collection may be seen by some as having value (it
may even thereby have economic value), and the collector may want
such a collection very intensely, and even think that his happiness and
fulfillment depend upon it. But this does not make his want into a
need, since thinking that something is valuable does not make it so.7
-- 10 of 23 --
ETHIcS 139
If this account of needs provides a response to the skeptical view,
however, it also puts a great deal of weight on the Designer’s value
judgements about the ways in which we should live. If the Designer
is to Design, as the Modernist view would hold, only for need, not
only has she to sort out ethical values relevant to what she makes,
as we discussed in section 7.1 above, but the very decision to make
at all implicates her in some kind of conceptualization of the way
we ought to live. Thus we are brought back to the lingering idea
of the Designer as a sort of seer or philosopher, whose task is not
merely to make things or solve problems, but to guide society in
some larger way.8
The idea that Designers, or anyone for that matter, can pro-
nounce about what counts as “genuine need” invites objections.
Colin Campbell, for example, argues that to declare some needs as
true and others false is “simply to express a prejudice in favor of
one specific conception of the good life,” and “will almost certainly
lead to the endorsing of traditionalistic, Puritanical and in all prob-
ability authoritarian, attitudes” (2010, 283).
Much of this is clearly exaggerated. It is no doubt true that it is
easy to be dogmatic about “the good life” or what is worthwhile or
valuable, much as it is easy to be dogmatic about other things, such
as what is true. But this by no means entails that all claims about
value are mere “prejudice”: claims about value can be mere preju-
dice but they can also be well thought out and grounded in good
reasons. It is also plainly not true that making judgements of value
will lead to authoritarianism: for example, in societies where freedom
is valued, judgements about the good will not be foisted upon indi-
viduals who may disagree with them, but the fact that such value
judgements are not imposed upon everyone does not make them
any less judgements of value, or any less correct.9 However, Camp-
bell’s points do have a particular salience in the context of Design,
for the Designer, unlike others, gets to embed her determinations
of the “good life” in material culture, and, in that sense, imposes
them on others.
7.4 Does Design Alter the Moral Landscape?
So far we have seen that ethics can have big implications for Design.
We can turn this around and ask whether Design has implications
-- 11 of 23 --
140 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN
for ethics. Some thinkers have even suggested that taking stock of
Design’s connection to ethics not only reveals a new area of ethical
issues and concerns, but in fact radically changes our understanding
of ethics itself. One such view is the idea that the products of Design
themselves should be viewed as moral agents.
One of the most important inspirations for this thesis is a famous
1980 essay by Langdon Winner called “Do artifacts have politics?”.
In that essay, Winner took issue with a widespread view on ethics
and technology, which is the view that, although people may
use technology in taking certain actions, it is only the actions
themselves, and not the artefacts employed, that are properly
subject to ethical evaluation. Winner elegantly described the view
as follows:
It is no surprise to learn that technical systems of various kinds are
deeply interwoven in the conditions of modern politics . . . But to
go beyond this obvious fact and to, at first glance, completely mis-
taken. We all know that people have politics; things do not. To
discover either virtues or evils in aggregates of steel, plastic, transis-
tors, integrated circuits, chemicals and the like seems just plain
wrong, a way of mystifying human artifice and of avoiding the true
sources, the human sources of freedom and oppression, justice and
injustice. (1980, 20)
On this common view, it is conceded that a bit of technology might
have political effects. Internet search engines, for example, might
be used to gather information on users in a way that corrodes their
right to privacy. But, in this case, the common view holds that it
would be misleading to say that the technological artefact – the
search engine – is unjust. Rather, the injustice is located in a human
action – namely, the misuse of that artefact by particular human
agents.
Winner acknowledges that this common view seems quite rea-
sonable, but he rejects it on the grounds that it obscures the
important role that artefacts play in ethical decision-making. To
locate the ethical responsibility only in the decisions of the human
agents, Winner argued, misses the fact that certain technologies, in
and of themselves, can direct and shape those decisions. Winner
offered the example of the highway overpasses built in New York
City in the 1950s by Robert Moses. Apparently, these were
deliberately built too low for buses to pass underneath, thereby
-- 12 of 23 --
ETHIcS 141
preventing the poorer Black New Yorkers, who did not own cars,
from reaching certain areas. In this case, Winner argued, there is a
political aspect to the artefact itself. If we focus only on the actions
of human agents, on what people in a society do, we fail to account
for the ways those actions are shaped, often subtly, by the material
environment. For example, if we looked for racism only in the
actions of New Yorkers, we would miss the segregation that is
quietly being carried out by the overpasses.
In his essay, Winner’s concern was mainly with the political
aspects of technology, but other authors have extended his general
approach to encompass moral as well as political values. The soci-
ologist Bruno Latour, for example, argued that an adequate
understanding of morality must include, as well as human agents,
non-human agents such as artefacts. “We have been able to delegate
to nonhumans . . . values, duties, and ethics,” he writes; “It is
because of this morality that we, humans, behave so ethically, no
matter how weak and wicked we feel we are” (1992, 232). Latour
emphasizes the many, often unnoticed, ways in which artefacts “act”
in ways that allow us to behave ethically. The speed bump, for
example, plays a crucial role in getting drivers to obey the laws and
drive safely. Latour insists that, in order to fully understand ethics,
we must eliminate the human/non-human distinction and incorpo-
rate non-human moral agents into our moral framework. Echoing
the views of Winner and Latour, the philosopher Peter-Paul
Verbeek maintains, “The conclusion seems justified that artefacts
have morality: technologies play an active role in moral action
and decision-making” (2008, 93). Verbeek refers to this phenome-
non of “the moral agency of technological artefacts” as “material
morality.”
The notion of material morality demands some close scrutiny,
given its great philosophical interest. For it portends nothing less
than a conceptual revolution with regard to ethical thinking. Tra-
ditionally, philosophers have reserved the title of “moral agent” for
a very specific sort of being: creatures capable of rational deliberation
and free, intentional choice. As it stands, this means that only
human beings count as moral agents (notice also that the require-
ment of rational deliberation rules out even humans who are chil-
dren and others incapable of rational deliberation, such as the
insane). Further, moral agency, on the traditional view, is intimately
linked to moral responsibility. If one acts out of moral agency, then
-- 13 of 23 --
142 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN
one is responsible for one’s action, and can be subjected to praise
or blame accordingly. However, we do not typically punish artefacts
for “wrongdoing.” So it would be a major conceptual shift were we
to do this, as the material morality thesis apparently suggests.
In support of the notion of material morality, it might be pointed
out that our ethical framework has undergone major revolution in
the past. For example, at various times and places, women and slaves
were regarded as unworthy of moral consideration. Furthermore,
and more recently, there has been an expansion in moral concern
to include non-human animals, and even non-sentient parts of the
environment.
However, we should examine these changes carefully. This expan-
sion has not been with respect to what it is to be a moral agent,
subject to responsibilities and worthy of praise or blame. In the case
of expanding moral consideration to non-human animals and non-
sentient entities such as trees or ecosystems, what has been at stake
is not an attribution of moral agency, but rather the quite different
status of having moral standing. So although many would argue that
trees or rivers have some moral standing, in that harming them may
be morally wrong, we do not think of bestowing moral praise or
blame on these entities, as we do with moral agents such as adult
human beings. To attribute moral agency to artefacts, then, would
be to significantly alter our conceptual framework in a way that has
no clear precedent.
Given this, we should ask what arguments can be given for, and
against, including artefacts amongst moral agents. Would there be
anything incoherent or problematic about this? One complication
in this debate is its overlap with a central debate in the field of
artificial intelligence, which is whether a computer could possess a
mind, or mental states, in the sense that human beings do. If it is
indeed possible for a computer to possess a mind, in the same sense
that a human does, then it is natural to think that such a computer
would be a moral agent in the same sense that a human being is a
moral agent.10 However, as Verbeek points out, this debate about
sentient computers is one that we can set aside in a general discus-
sion of material morality (2011, 50). For a sentient computer would
be an artefact of a very specific and sophisticated kind, able to
behave in ways analogous, or even superior, to a human being. But
the question of whether artefacts have moral agency is one raised
about much more mundane artefacts: overpasses, speed bumps and
-- 14 of 23 --
ETHIcS 143
the like. So the question we need to focus on is whether attributing
moral agency to these artefacts would be problematic.
One obvious objection to this view is that although such artefacts
have effects, they do not really “act,” since they cannot form inten-
tions to do anything. Since moral agency requires that the agent
perform actions intentionally, or on purpose (having some goal in
mind), artefacts of this type cannot be moral agents. In response to
this objection, Verbeek notes that the original etymology of the
word “intend” is “to direct.” He then argues that, since it is clear
that artefacts can direct our behavior in various ways (consider the
examples of the highway overpass and the speed bump, mentioned
above), they can have intentionality.
Against this, one might object that “intentionality,” in the context
of discussions of moral agency, means much more than merely
“directing a course of action.” It means directing one’s own course
of action toward some goal or end. As such, it requires a set of
psychological states on the part of the agent: beliefs about that
course of action and its relation to a goal, as well as some sort of
desire that the course of action come about. Without these psycho-
logical elements, it might be said, we are simply not discussing
“intentional action” in the sense relevant to moral agency. In this
sense, it seems that speed bumps and overpasses do not have
intentionality, and so cannot be considered moral agents. However,
this argument concerning intentions might ultimately be beside
the point. After all, one might argue that, whether they have
intentions or not, artefacts clearly do act in the sense that, when
humans act ethically, part of the “work” is done by the artefact
(Latour 1992).
A different argument against attributing moral agency to such
artefacts is that they lack a crucial attribute of genuine moral agency
– freedom. Whereas what artefacts do is determined by causal
forces, what humans do is not. Thus Deborah Johnson argues that
humans count as moral agents only because of a “mysterious, non-
deterministic aspect of moral agency” (2006, 200). Since we have
no reason to think that artefacts could ever act in this mysterious
non-deterministic way, we have no grounds for attributing moral
agency to them. However, this argument is a weak one, relying as
it does on the premise that humans possess a “mysterious, non-
deterministic agency.” Many have argued that the apparent freedom
of will that humans possess is an illusion, and that human action is
-- 15 of 23 --
144 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN
just as determined as what happens to artefacts and physical objects
in general. Those who argue this way nonetheless hold that, in some
sense, people are moral agents.
Yet another argument against attributing moral agency to arte-
facts is that moral agency entails moral responsibility, but, as men-
tioned earlier, it would make no sense to hold artefacts responsible
for their “actions.” For example, what would it mean to hold some-
thing like a speed bump or an overpass responsible? Of course, if
such an artefact was doing harm, we would want to eliminate it, and
if it were doing some good, we might want to maintain or more
widely implement it. But this is not the same as holding it respon-
sible for its actions, as we do with people.
In response to this sort of objection, Floridi and Sanders (2004)
argue that the concept of moral agency can be coherently separated
from the notion of moral responsibility.11 In support of this,
they point to cases involving dogs and children. We often praise or
blame these creatures when they carry out an action that we deem
good or bad (“bad dog”), although we recognize that they are not
morally responsible for their actions. This seems to show that we
have a concept of moral agency – being the source of a morally
good or bad action – that does not require moral responsibility. In
a similar way, we might say things such as “these speed bumps are
good” and “those overpasses are evil,” although we do not hold
them morally responsible in the way we hold people morally
responsible.
This reply to the objection, however, only points to a deeper flaw
with the moral agency thesis, even in its more modest formulations.
If artefacts are not subject to moral responsibility, then what will be
the upshot of turning the focus of our ethical analysis toward them?
It must be to make moral responsibility for whatever effects those
artefacts have more elusive. A “bad” artefact is one that must be
replaced, but who is responsible for this? It is not the artefact, or
any other artefact, but must be some human being, a moral agent
in the full sense (Johnson 2006; Noorman 2014).
This can be illustrated with regard to Verbeek’s example of hand-
guns. Do people kill people, or do guns kill people? Verbeek insists
that this traditional question is misguided, for “agency should not
be located exclusively in either the gun or the person shooting, but
in the assembly of both” (2011, 64). But exactly what is gained by
assigning part of the moral agency to the gun? If guns cannot be
-- 16 of 23 --
ETHIcS 145
held responsible, as Verbeek elsewhere seems to admit, then what
is to be done about their “bad behavior?” The guns will not respond
to our moral reproaches, so some human agent will need to inter-
vene. Who will this be: gun manufacturers? Law-makers? The
police? Attributing moral agency to guns does not help address this
question but in fact only serves to obscure it. The problem with
extending moral agency to artefacts, then, is that it makes it harder
for us to focus our ethical analysis where it is ultimately needed: on
human decisions and actions. Another way to put the point is that
it reifies technology into something analogous to human moral
agents, when in fact it is not.
But what of the argument, given by Latour, that we must acknowl-
edge the moral agency of artefacts simply because they do so much
of our “moral work”: that, as Verbeek puts it, “technologies are
morally active” (2011, 57)? It can certainly be conceded that
artefacts do “moral work,” in one sense, in that the decisions and
actions that people take are certainly affected and shaped by
their material environment. However, in another sense, artefacts do
no “moral work” at all, for we are not interested in the ways in
which artefacts influence human moral behavior in the same way
that we are interested in human moral behavior itself. While the
former is important, it can only be the preliminary to a full moral
analysis.
As an analogy, it is useful to consider the relationship between
artefacts and athletics. It is indisputable that artefacts influence
human athletic performance, in numerous ways: improvements in
bike design improve cycling speed, better shoes improve running
times, and so on. One might argue that, through Designing this
technology, we have “delegated” athletic performance to these arte-
facts, in the sense that significant portions of particular athletic
achievements can be attributed to these artefacts.12 Nonetheless, no
one would argue that we should extend the concept of “athlete” to
shoes and bikes, or say that an athlete is not really a human being,
but a human being and his bicycle. The reason for this is that,
although artefacts shape the context of athletic performance in
multiple ways, we are primarily interested not in this, but in human
performance itself. In the case of morality, as our primary interest
lies in human decision-making, not in the influence of artefacts on
it, we have legitimate reason to exclude artefacts from the category
of moral agency.
-- 17 of 23 --
146 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN
7.5 The Designer Stands Alone?
Whatever we ultimately say on this rather abstruse issue, however,
it is important to remember that, even if we cannot extend moral
agency, in some meaningful sense or another, to artefacts, we should
recognize that they influence the behavior of moral agents to such
an extent that they must figure in our moral analyses. Certain arte-
facts may shape the way people live, and the lives they lead, and
make possible certain moral decisions that were otherwise impos-
sible. As discussed in section 1.3, this places tremendous weight on
the Designer as an ethical decision-maker. The artefacts she creates
will shape the practices and beliefs of, potentially, multiple genera-
tions of human beings, often in quite subtle ways that may not
even be recognized by those people. Thus we return, at last, to the
lonely image, encountered in chapter 2, of the Designer standing
over against the massive and intractable task of leading society into
the future.
In our earlier encounter with this idea, we viewed it in the context
of the so-called “epistemological problem” for Design: the difficulty
the Designer has in determining whether or not his novel creation
is liable to be successful. The issue of uncertainty regarding conse-
quences arises in the moral context as well (Sollie 2007). But the
ethical issue has an additional dimension. For the question con-
fronting the Designer is not simply the empirical question – Will
this device do what it is supposed to? – but rather the ethical ques-
tion – Should there be a device that does this? This shift in the
focus of the question does not make it any more straightforward,
but only adds a different sort of perplexity. For how is the Designer
to decide, as we discussed in section 7.3, what things should do –
what people truly need? Which part of the Designer’s methodology
or training can equip her to answer these normative questions?
There is an important question to be raised here about the true
extent of the Designer’s responsibility. In chapter 2, we discussed
the fact that Designers are typically not given carte blanche but are
often handed a very specific brief. Many of the ethically relevant
aspects of the project may not be up for negotiation; consider a
commissioned Design for a hospital, for example. There may be all
sorts of ethically important aspects of the project that are simply
out of the Designer’s control.13 Perhaps, then, it is society as a whole
that should be held responsible, rather than the individual Designer.
-- 18 of 23 --
ETHIcS 147
However, while it is true that, in given cases, many of the ethically
relevant decisions may occur prior to the Design process, it is also
true that society increasingly views Design as the proper place for
such ethical deliberation to take place. The question is how Design
can perform this role.
This question has led to many attempts to find a “formalized
approach” for ethical Design, a specific methodology for incorpo-
rating values into Design. One of the more prominent of these
approaches is “Value Sensitive Design” (VSD; Friedman et al. 2002;
Cummings 2006). Value Sensitive Design involves a three-part
approach, consisting of conceptual, empirical and technical analy-
ses. The conceptual analysis consists, as one writer puts it, in “an
analysis informed by those value constructs relevant to the Design
in question” (Cummings 2006, 702). VSD identifies twelve human
values that are relevant to Design: human welfare, ownership,
privacy, freedom from bias, universal usability, trust, autonomy,
informed consent, accountability, calmness, identity and environ-
mental sustainability. In the conceptual phase of VSD, the way in
which the Design may impact upon these values, as they are held
by the stakeholders affected, is considered. These stakeholders can
be either direct stakeholders, who use the Design in question, or
indirect stakeholders, who may be indirectly affected by it.
The empirical phase of VSD involves taking measurements and
making observations to assess how the Design in question actually
affects the relevant human values. In this stage, the focus is on
testing how people actually respond to and interact with the Design,
and what effects the Design has in actual situations. Finally, the
technical phase sees the Designers exploring different ways of
implementing their concepts so as to best realize the values identi-
fied in the conceptual phase.
Cummings illustrates VSD methodology with the example of a
missile guidance system that allows for missile redirection to a new
target in mid-flight. In the conceptual phase, human welfare is
identified as the main relevant value, and the pertinent issue as
“whether an engineer can ethically design a weapon” (2006, 705).
This question is addressed by noting that philosophical and legal
doctrines of “just war,” such as the United Nations Charter, require
military actions to be discriminatory, targeting only military and
not civilian targets. Since re-directable missiles are “intended to
destroy military targets with pinpoint accuracy and thus minimize
-- 19 of 23 --
148 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN
civilian casualty loss” (706), the Design in question supports the
value of human welfare. The main Design issue arising from this
Design concept is the level of automation to be implemented in the
redirection process: to what extent should redeployment of active
ordinance to another target be left to human discretion, and to what
extent should automated recommendations for redirection be
employed? In the empirical phase, these questions are explored by
observing human decisions in prototype systems with varying levels
of automation, and in the technical phase ways of implementing
automation are considered.
Methodologies such as VSD are certainly useful tools in drawing
ethical concerns more fully into the process of Design. However, do
they really succeed in addressing the sorts of worries raised above
about the Designer’s ability to tackle ethical issues? It seems clear
that they do not take us far. Manders-Huits (2011) points out a
number of important limitations to approaches such as VSD (see
also Albrechtslund 2007). One problem involves “how to deal with
the . . . empirical investigations concerning values” (2011, 279). In
the empirical phase, Designers are to assess how interaction with the
Design will affect relevant values. In the missile example, this assess-
ment is relatively straightforward, in that one can measure how
many missiles struck unwanted targets. But in many cases, deter-
mining how values are affected must be done by asking subjects.
These empirical results, however, can be difficult to interpret, as dif-
ferent subjects may understand a value like “autonomy” or “privacy”
in very different ways. Furthermore, it is difficult to know what to do
with these sorts of empirical results. As Manders-Huits writes:
“What does it mean if 67% of the users say that they fear security
issues? And do they all refer to the same conception of security? In
addition, how does the 67% fear of security problems relate to the
49% fear of privacy issues?” (2011, 279). An even deeper problem
with the empirical phase is that these assessments of the values held
by different stakeholders are descriptive, rather than normative.
Manders-Huits writes, “There is an implicit assumption in the
methodology of VSD that one will know what to do in a normative
sense, once these values are known. This, I contend, is where VSD
runs the risk of committing the naturalistic fallacy” (2011, 279).
An even more fundamental limitation of the VSD approach,
however, concerns its conceptual phase. It is in this phase that the
relevant values are identified, and the overall ethical direction of
-- 20 of 23 --
ETHIcS 149
the Design project is determined. In Cummings’s missile guidance
system example discussed above, for example, the ethical question
of whether to build this weapon is decided by appealing to an idea
within “just war” theory. However, if our aim is to design ethical
technology, it is not enough for the technology to align with
accepted ethical theories – it should align with true ethical theories.
Cummings does not argue for the truth of this theory, nor is it at
all apparent that Designers would have the capacity to engage with
this ethical question. Further, in many cases Designers will face
conflict between different values that can be defended by appealing
to conflicting ethical theories: the conceptual phase does not indi-
cate how such conflicts can be addressed or resolved. Manders-
Huits sums up this line of thought by saying that “VSD requires
complimentary ethical theory and expertise” (2011, 282).14
These limitations of VSD are important to note, because if such
techniques cannot provide a satisfactory answer to the question of
how Designers are able to do ethics – if, in addition, ethical expertise
is required – then the question must inevitably be asked: who are
Designers to be making these ethical decisions? If the Designer has
no particular ethical expertise, his or her ethical decisions are apt
to be regarded as arbitrary by the wider community affected by
them. The Designer will, of course, have his or her own values –
autonomy, privacy, sustainability or whatever – and these may be as
sensible as anyone else’s values. But the Designer seems no more
entitled to “legislate” those values than any other citizen. Yet, this
is precisely what happens. This generates a particularly acute dif-
ficulty, given that so many of the mediating effects of Design are
ones that go unnoticed by users. The Designer, in this context,
becomes a shadowy figure quietly foisting her values upon an unsus-
pecting public.
There are ways to respond to this idea of the Designer as invisible
tyrant. One is to insist upon the primacy of agency as a value in
Design. In his study of nanotechnology, the philosopher Alfred
Nordmann (2005) argues that the raison d’être of technology is to
increase our control over nature and reduce the extent to which
nature operates as a set of unknown background forces beyond our
control. Nordmann employs this premise in his critique of nano-
technology, arguing that because the operation of nanotechnology
takes place at an imperceptible level, where it is beyond our control,
it is flawed technology, reducing rather than enhancing human
-- 21 of 23 --
150 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN
agency. We might extend Nordmann’s analysis to Design in general,
arguing that Designers should not create systems that impose
actions or ways of perceiving upon users, but only ones that present
them with choices for action or perception. This approach would,
in a way, allow Designers to dodge the question “Who are you to
do ethics?” by creating only tools for action. Another way to look
at this approach is as an attempt to rein in the mediating effects of
Design entities, and restrict them only to effects that leave room
for deliberate control and informed consent.
However, this approach is problematic. Designing for agency
certainly seems like a good thing in many contexts. However, it is
probably not desirable, or even possible, to Design in such a way
as to completely avoid imposing values. Some complex devices, at
least, might well become unusable if the user had to make conscious
decisions about every aspect of their operation. Consider our earlier
example of the photocopier: a photocopier with no default settings
at all would be so time-consuming to use as to be effectively useless.
Thus, it doesn’t seem feasible for the Designer to simply dodge the
problem in this way.
A second, and related, response to the problem is to endorse
some version of the idea of participatory Design.15 This is the idea
that Designers should not create Designs and then make them avail-
able to users, but rather that Designers and users co-design, thereby
creating an entity that is better adapted to its users. In an ethical
context, participatory Design appears to allow the Designer to avoid
the sting of the objection, since the Designer does not impose her
personal values in the Design she creates: rather, the Design is as
much the product of the community of users and their values as it
is the product of the Designer and her values. Participatory Design
is thereby seen as inherently democratic.
But while the general idea of participatory Design is certainly
important and useful in some contexts, it suffers from many of the
same limitations that we noted for approaches such as VSD. For
instance, it runs the risk of committing the naturalistic fallacy:
simply adopting values people actually hold as opposed to engaging
in moral analysis. Furthermore, if moral discourse or debate is
included in the model, as seems appropriate, then the question of
expertise only re-emerges insofar as the qualifications of the public
stakeholders are as dubious as those of the Designer herself, if not
more so.
-- 22 of 23 --
ETHIcS 151
An alternative approach would be to say that if the Designer is
not, or cannot be, an ethicist, the ethical dimension of her task
should be handled by a distinct person, working in conjunction
with the Designer.16 This approach is already employed in certain
contexts where “qualified ethicists” (usually philosophers) are
involved in systems Design, such as in the Design of health-care
protocols. If the ethical problems raised by Design are too much
for that practice to resolve, then perhaps ultimately it must be
relieved of them.
-- 23 of 23 --